@c "hacprsim/intro.texi"
@c $Id: intro.texi,v 1.1 2007/08/20 21:12:33 fang Exp $

@node Applications
@chapter Applications

This chapter is devoted to giving examples of how to use
@command{hacprsim}, with numerous examples of @HAC{} and simulation scripts.  
This is arguably the most useful chapter for users.  

@menu
* Basic Demonstrations::
* Simulation vs. Netlist::
* Shared Internal Nodes::
* Internal Precharges::
* Custom Power Supplies::
* Debugging::
* Checkpointing and Tracing::
* Diagnostic and Behavior Control::
* Testing with Channels (synchronous)::
* Testing with Channels (asynchronous)::
* Defensive Design::
* Workflow Examples::
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Basic Demonstrations
@section Basic Demonstrations

As every language has its "Hello, World!" example, so does @hacprsim{}.

@subsection Basic Compile and Run
To get started, write the following @HAC{} file:

@example
// "inv1.hac"
bool a, b;
prs @{
   a -> b-
  ~a -> b+
@}
@end example

@noindent
This declares two rules for the opposing pull networks
that make an inverter.
The order in which rules are written does not matter;
everything is concurrent.

Compile it into an object file.

@example
@shellkbd{haco inv1.hac inv1.haco}
@end example

@noindent
Object files are the primary inputs to all back end tools.
They consist of internal hierarchical representations of the 
described circuit.

Run it, by loading the object file.

@example
@shellkbd{hacprsim inv1.haco}
@prsimkbd
@end example

@noindent
You've succesfully loaded the simulation.
The simulator awaits your command.

@example
@prsimkbd{time}
time: 0
@prsimkbd{watchall}
@prsimkbd{get a}
a : X
@prsimkbd{get b}
b : X
@end example

@noindent
Every node is initially @t{X}, unknown value.

@example
@prsimkbd{set a 0}
@prsimkbd{get a}
a : X
@end example

@noindent
Wait, but didn't we just set @var{a}?
@example
@prsimkbd{why-x a}
a:X, pending event -> 0
@prsimkbd{pending a}
queue:  0       a : 0
@prsimkbd{queue}
event queue:
        0       a : 0
@end example

@noindent
The @command{set} command doesn't change the value right away, 
it only @emph{schedules} it right away.  
Above, the @command{why-x} command reports that a transition on a:0 is pending,
in the event queue.
@command{pending} reports whether a node has a pending transition in queue.
@command{queue} prints the entire event queue.
To advance the simulation, we need to @command{step} or
@command{cycle} (run until no events remain in queue).

@example
@prsimkbd{cycle}
        0       a : 0
        10      b : 1   [by a:=0]
@prsimkbd{assert b 1}
@prsimkbd{queue}
event queue:
@prsimkbd{time}
time: 10
@prsimkbd{get a}
a : 0
@prsimkbd{get b}
b : 1   [by a:=0]
@end example

With the @command{watchall} at the beginning,
the simulator reports every node transition as it happens.
The change on @var{a} triggered an event on @var{b}, which then executed, 
leaving the event queue empty at time 10.
The @command{get} command simply prints the current value of a node.
At any time, we can @command{assert} that nodes have the values we expect.
Should an @command{assert}ion fail, the simulator will halt.
A failed @command{assert}ion (or similar fatal error) in a script
will terminate the simulator and return a non-zero exit status.

@example
@prsimkbd{set a 1}
@prsimkbd{cycle}
        10      a : 1
        20      b : 0   [by a:=1]
@prsimkbd{assert b 0}
@end example

@noindent
We can also query the connectivity of rules and nodes, 
which look like the written production rules.

@example
@prsimkbd{fanout a}
Fanouts of node `a':
(to [top-level]):
[after 10]      a -> b-
[after 10]      ~a -> b+
@prsimkbd{fanout-get a}
Fanouts of node `a':
(to [top-level]):
[after 10]      a:1 -> b-:0
[after 10]      ~a:1 -> b+:0
@prsimkbd{fanin b}
Fanins of node `b':
(from [top-level]):
[after 10]      ~a -> b+
[after 10]      a -> b-
@prsimkbd{fanin-get b}
Fanins of node `b':
(from [top-level]):
[after 10]      ~a:1 -> b+:0
[after 10]      a:1 -> b-:0
@prsimkbd{fanin a}
Fanins of node `a':
@prsimkbd{fanout b}
Fanouts of node `b':
@end example

@noindent
The @command{-get} variants of these commands print the current value
of each node, following a @t{:} (colon).

Compile and run the the following example, a NAND gate.

@example
bool a, b, _c;
prs @{
  a & b   => _c-
@}
@end example

The @command{fanin-get} and @command{fanout-get} commands
print more information about the values of subexpressions.

@example
@prsimkbd{set a 1}
@prsimkbd{set b 1}
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@prsimkbd{fanin-get _c}
Fanins of node `_c':
(from [top-level]):
[after 10]      ~a:1 | ~b:1<0><0> -> _c+:0
[after 10]      a:1 & b:1<1><1> -> _c-:0
@end example

@noindent
Expressions like @t{<0>} denote the value of the subexpression
immediately to its left.  The @t{<0>} after @t{~a:1 | ~b:1} comes from
the evaluation of @t{0|0}.  The very last @t{<0>} on the same line
is the OR-combined value of all expressions in all rules that pull @t{_c} up,
which in this case, is just the value of the only guard expression.

There is one optional compilation step that a user may wish to run:

@example
@shellkbd{haccreate inv1.haco inv1.haco-c}
@end example

@noindent
@haccreate{} compiles the object file further by expanding
instances in the hierarchy ('create') from the top-down, 
and caching the expanded structures internally.  
The result is a larger object file.  
Many errors are not caught until this expansion is done, 
for example, index-out-of-array-bounds errors.  
It is advised to compile through the @haccreate{} phase
in your workflow to catch errors as early as possible.
All of @HACKT{}'s back-end tools like @hacprsim{} and @hacknet{}
will accept either pre-created and post-created object files.
The back-end tools will automatically invoke @haccreate{} (internally),
before performing their function.

@itemize
@item @shellkbd{hacprsim inv1.haco}
@item @shellkbd{hacprsim inv1.haco-c}
@end itemize

@noindent
give the exact same behavior.

You now know how to compile and run a circuit in @hacprsim{},
set and query values, advance the simulation, and examine 
the status of production rule fanin and fanout.  

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Built-in Commands

Let's take a minute to introduce the in-program help system, 
along with other built-in commands.

@example
@prsimkbd{help}
available categories: 
        builtin --- built-in commands
        channels --- channel commands
        debug --- debugging internals
        general --- general commands
        info --- information about simulated circuit
        modes --- timing model, error handling
        simulation --- simulation commands
        tracing --- trace and checkpoint commands
        view --- instance to watch
help: lists available commands and categories
to get usage for a specific command or category, run: help <name>
help all: lists all commands across all categories
@end example

@noindent
Event the @command{help} command has a description.
@example
@prsimkbd{help help}
help: lists available commands and categories
to get usage for a specific command or category, run: help <name>
help all: lists all commands across all categories
@end example

@noindent
One can also list commands available by category (alphabetically):
@example
@prsimkbd{help builtin}
Commands available in the 'builtin' category:
        # -- comments are ignored
        abort -- exits simulator with fatal status
        alias -- defines alias to auto-expand by the interpreter
        aliases -- show all registered command aliases
        all -- show all commands
        cd -- change current working instance/directory
        comment -- comments are ignored
        dirs -- print entire instance/directory stack
        echo -- prints arguments back to stdout, space-delimited
        ...
@end example

@noindent
To see a comprehensive list of all commands (by category):
@example
@prsimkbd{help all}
        ...
@end example

To see a history of commands we entered
(useful for retracing your steps, or saving scripts):
@example
@prsimkbd{history}
history[0..3]:
0       help
1       help help
2       help builtin
3       help all
@end example

@noindent
In scripts, sometimes you just want to print a message
@example
@prsimkbd{echo ---- YOU ARE HERE ----}
---- YOU ARE HERE ----
@end example

@noindent
Scripts may contain comments, which are ignored by the interpreter
@example
@prsimkbd{# I am a very useful comment, really.}
@end example

@noindent
Should you find some commands too long to type, you may create 
short-hand aliases.
@example
@prsimkbd{alias ? help}
@prsimkbd{alias e echo}
@prsimkbd{alias h history}
@prsimkbd{alias a alias}
@prsimkbd{a r repeat}
@prsimkbd{? time}
time
shows the current time
@prsimkbd{e hello}
hello
@prsimkbd{? aliases}
aliases
lists all active defined command aliases
@prsimkbd{aliases}
Command aliases:
        ? -> help 
        a -> alias 
        e -> echo 
        h -> history 
        r -> repeat 
@end example

@noindent
The interpreter always expands aliases (recursively) in prefix position.
Aliases can be cancelled with the @command{unalias} command.

Any command can be @command{repeat}ed with:
@example
@prsimkbd{repeat 3 echo I love this!}
I love this!
I love this!
I love this!
@prsimkbd{r 3 e I love this even more!}
I love this even more!
I love this even more!
I love this even more!
@end example

Finally, the interactive environment can be exited with 
@command{exit} or @command{quit} or Ctrl-D.

@example
@prsimkbd{exit}
@shellkbd
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Subcircuit Processes

More interesting systems will be designed as a hierarchy of subcircuits.  
Let us define an inverter:

@example
// "inv.hac"
defproc inv(bool? a; bool! b) @{
  prs @{
     a -> b-
    ~a -> b+
  @}
@}
@end example

@noindent
Note that we specify direction on ports @var{a} and @var{b}.
This is helpful enabling connectivity diagnostics at compile time.  

Next, instantiate it a few times:
@example
// "inv-test.hac"
import "inv.hac";    @i{// include used definitions}
bool x, y, z;
inv I(x, y);         @i{// instantiate with port connections}
inv J(y, z);
@end example

@noindent
It helps to separate definitions from top-level instances, 
so that common files contain only definitions.  
Compile and run @file{inv-test.hac}.
@example
@shellkbd{haco inv-test.hac inv-test.haco}
@shellkbd{hacprsim inv-test.haco}
@prsimkbd{watchall}
@end example

@noindent
Let us introduce some new information commands.
When working with an unfamiliar circuit it helps to know what 
a name refers to with the @command{what} command.

@example
@prsimkbd{what I}
I refers to process-inst-ref inv<>
@prsimkbd{what a}
a refers to bool-inst-ref bool<>
@end example

@noindent
During initialization or operation, we often want to 
know what nodes still have unknown value.

@example
@prsimkbd{status X}
X nodes:
x y z
@prsimkbd{status 0}
0 nodes:
!GND 
@prsimkbd{status 1}
1 nodes:
!Vdd 
@end example

@noindent
The @command{status} command lists all node with a particular value.
@command{status-newline} reports the same information with each
node on its own line.
@t{!Vdd} and @t{!GND} are special implicit power supplies that
are automatically connected through the hierarchy.

We can query any node for its equivalent aliases with @command{who} or
@command{who-newline}:
@example
@prsimkbd{who y}
aliases of "y":
I.b J.a y 
@prsimkbd{who-newline y}
aliases of "y":
I.b
J.a
y
@end example

@cindex alias (node)
@noindent
Using any of these aliases in interactive commands will reference the
same physical node.  

@cindex directory view
@cindex file-system view
A very useful way of viewing the circuit hierarchy in
the interpreter like a file system.
Think of the top-level of the circuit like a "home directory."

@example
@prsimkbd{pwd}
~
@prsimkbd{ls}
top-level instances: 
Instances:
  !GND = bool<> !GND
  !Vdd = bool<> !Vdd
  I = inv<> I
  J = inv<> J
  x = bool<> x
  y = bool<> y
  z = bool<> z
@end example

@noindent
@bool{}s (or nodes) are like files, 
and processes (subcircuits) are like directories.  
You can get listings of names at any level of hierarchy using @command{ls}.

@example
@prsimkbd{ls I}
I (type: inv<>) has members: 
Instances:
  !GND = bool
  !Vdd = bool
  a = bool
  b = bool
@end example

@noindent
The @command{rules} command shows what production rules belong to a process.
@example
@prsimkbd{rules .}
[top-level]
rules:
@prsimkbd{rules J}
J refers to process-inst-ref inv<>
rules:
[after 10]      y -> z-
[after 10]      ~y -> z+
@end example

@noindent
Note that @command{rules} prints nodes using their @emph{global} names,
rather than their subcircuit-local names.  
@command{rules-verbose} prints production rules annotated
with nodes' current values.  

@noindent
One can descend into processes with directory commands.

@example
@prsimkbd{cd I}
@prsimkbd{ls}
I (type: inv<>) has members: 
Instances:
  !GND = bool
  !Vdd = bool
  a = bool
  b = bool
@prsimkbd{cd ..}
@prsimkbd{pushd J}
@prsimkbd{ls}
J (type: inv<>) has members: 
Instances:
  !GND = bool
  !Vdd = bool
  a = bool
  b = bool
@prsimkbd{dirs}
J ~ 
@prsimkbd{cd ../I}
@prsimkbd{dirs}
I ~ 
@prsimkbd{popd}
@prsimkbd{pwd}
~
@end example

@b{Productivity tip:}
If the tools were compiled @option{--with-readline},
you can also tab-complete names on many commands, 
much like file-name completion.  

Now we return to actually driving the circuit.
@example
@prsimkbd{set x 0}
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@end example

@noindent
Unless we enabled @command{watchall}, 
we don't see any reports of transitions.
We can still inspect the state of nodes:

@example
@prsimkbd{getlocal .}
!GND : 0
!Vdd : 1
x : 0
y : 1
z : 0
@end example

@noindent
The @command{getlocal} command reports the values of all nodes
in the referenced scope (process).  Here, '.' refers to the current 
working directory, which is the top-level.  
We can also query a node for the series of recent events that
led to its current value:

@example
@prsimkbd{backtrace z}
event    : `z' : 0 @ 20
caused by: `y' : 1 @ 10
caused by: `x' : 0 @ 0
(no cycle)
@end example

@noindent
As the simulator executes events, it keeps track of the
most recent event that @emph{caused} each transition to be scheduled.
This forms a critical path causality chain.  
This can be useful for debugging unexpected values
or estimating delays on performance-critical paths.  
@t{no cycle} means that the iterative query found no causing event,
which is often the case with user-driven inputs.  
The backtrace will report @t{cycle reached} if it encounters
a transition a second time in the trace.  

Now you have learned how to navigate the circuit hierarchy 
in the simulator, and obtain more information about named
nodes and subcircuits.  


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c @node Simulation vs. Netlist
@node Simulation vs. Netlist
@section Simulation vs. Netlist

The @HAC{} language was designed to allow a user to express
circuit behavior and topology, however, there are instances when
one needs to express equivalent circuits in different forms.
In cases like these, the compilation of the @HAC{} will depend on the
target backend tool.
It is advised to minimize the number of places in a circuit description
that diverge, as these are often error-prone and require thorough designer
review.  

@subsection Expression Ordering

Production rules in @HAC{} serve two purposes: to specific digital logic
behavior and transistor topology.
It is important to understand how the production rules are 
translated into netlists.

@itemize
@item The order in which instances are declared bears no consequence
on logical behavior nor the spice netlist.
@item The order in which rules are written also does not affect
logical nor netlist behavior.
@item The order of literals in guard expressions does not affect
logical behavior, but it does affect the netlist.
Series transistors start at the power supply and append
towards the output node.
In other words, the leftmost literal (in an AND expression)
is closest to the supply, and the rightmost literal is closest
to the output.  
@end itemize

@noindent
Consider the following example, an OR-combination
of two pull-down stacks:

@example
prs @{
  a & b & c  -> o-
  d & e & f  -> o-
@}
@end example

@noindent
The transistors gated by @var{a} and @var{d} have their
sources connected to the ground supply.  
The transistors gated by @var{c} and @var{f} have their
drains connected to the output @var{o}.
You can think of every @t{&}-operator as representing
an unnamed internal node between two (or more) transistors.

It is a good practice to mind transistor ordering when
writing production rules.  

@subsection Tool Selection Headers

Let's create two @HAC{} header files for the sake of tool selection.  

@example
// "tool-simulation.hac"
pbool SIMULATION = true;
pbool NETLIST = false;
@end example

@noindent
and

@example
// "tool-netlist.hac"
pbool SIMULATION = false;
pbool NETLIST = true;
@end example

One of these files is to be passed to the @command{haco} compiler
via the @option{-i} option, which prepends the named file before
all input.  
Instead of producing a generic @t{.haco} object file, 
one should produce an object file for each back-end tool.

@example
@shellkbd{haco -i tool-simulation.hac circuit.hac circuit.haco-sim}
@shellkbd{haco -i tool-netlist.hac circuit.hac circuit.haco-net}
@end example

@noindent
This way it is clear which object file is intended for which tool.

An alternative way of compiling is write a top-level source
file that @t{import}s one of these header files, but most users
find this more cumbersome than passing a single command-line option.  

Note that @t{SIMULATION} and @t{NETLIST} are just variable names;
they are not keywords with any special meaning to the compiler.  
Another convention may choose to a single enumeral value instead
of a set of boolean variables to specify the intended tool.  
Follow the convention established in your project.  

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Wire

As an example, let's take a simple wire.

@example
defproc long_wire(bool? in; bool! out) @{
  in = out;
@}
@end example

If one wishes to model propagation delay on @t{long_wire} in simulation, 
one could rewrite this as:

@example
defproc long_wire(bool? in; bool! out) @{
[ NETLIST ->
  in = out;
[] SIMULATION ->
  prs @{
     in -> out+
    ~in -> out-
  @}
]
@}
@end example

In @hacprsim{}, there will be some delay between @var{in} and @var{out}, 
as modeled by the non-inverting rule, but the spice netlist will still
show them as different names for the same wire.  

As a reminder, @hacknet{} would error out if it tried to emit a netlist
for non-CMOS-implementable rules like the above.
CMOS-implementability requires pull-up rules to contain only
negated literals, and pull-down rules to contain only non-negated literals.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Staticizers

@cindex staticizer
@cindex keeper
@cindex dynamic logic
One of @HAC{}'s features is the ability to easily express 
dynamic logic with distinct pull-up and pull-down rules.
Dynamic logic, however, requires staticizers (or keepers)
to maintain state on a node that is not actively driven.  

In @hacprsim{}, all nodes behave as if they are staticized, that is, 
their last set value remains until it is actively driven to another value.
The @HAC{} language requires that users write explicit staticizers
in circuit definitions for them to appear in netlists produced by 
@hacknet{}.  
The easiest way to declare a rule as part of a staticizer is with the
@t{iskeeper} rule attribute.

@cindex C-element
Consider the following example of a C-element:

@example
bool a, b, _c, c;
prs @{
         a &  b  -> _c-
        ~a & ~b  -> _c+
        _c       => c-
  [iskeeper=1] c => _c-
@}
@end example

@noindent
In the above example, the last rule is the feedback inverter
that holds the state of @var{_c} when it is not pulled in either direction.  

Alternatively, you can also write @t{[iskeeper]} for short, 
or write the pull-up and pull-down rules separately.  

@example
  [iskeeper] ~c -> _c+
  [iskeeper]  c -> _c-
@end example

How do @hacprsim{} and @hacknet{} treat the @t{iskeeper} attribute?
By default, @hacprsim{} ignores all rules marked with @t{iskeeper}
because every node is already treated as if it were staticized
@footnote{There is a @option{-f fast-weak-keepers} option that does
model keepers as zero-delay weak rules, but its use is discouraged.}.
@hacknet{} will emit devices for rules marked @t{iskeeper}, 
but named in a way that makes its purpose obvious.
Note that with @t{iskeeper}, there is no need to conditionalize
the circuit definition on variables like @t{SIMULATION} and @t{NETLIST}.  

At the time of writing there is no automatic insertion
of staticizers into netlists.  
(Other tools can be used to check for missing or incorrect staticizers.)

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection Combinational Feedback
@cindex combinational feedback

Worth mentioning is a common technique to turn dynamic logic
into static logic: combinational feedback.
Generally, the state-holding feedback circuit only turns on
when it needs to hold state, to avoid relying on ratioed sizing
to overpower feedback.

@cindex C-element
Here is our C-element example re-written with combinational feedback:

@example
bool a, b, _c, c;
prs @{
         a &  b  -> _c-
        ~a & ~b  -> _c+
        _c       => c-
   c & ( a |  b) -> _c-    @i{// combinational feedback}
  ~c & (~a | ~b) -> _c+    @i{// combinational feedback}
@}
@end example

@noindent
Suppose the initial state is @var{a}:0 @var{b}:0
@var{_c}:1 @var{c}:0.
In this state, the feedback pull-down on @var{_c} is cut-off.
When @var{b} goes to 1, the pull-up on @var{_c} turns on, 
actively holding the state.
When @var{a} goes to 1, the pull-up on @var{_c} turns off, 
letting the pull-down win without a fight.  
In no state is @var{_c} undriven, making this a combinational circuit.

Explicit combination feedback doesn't require any special handling
in @hacprsim{} or @hacknet{}.  
However, it may help other tools that read netlists to flag
rules as belonging to combinational feedback:

@example
prs @{
  [isckeeper]  c & ( a |  b) -> _c-
  [isckeeper] ~c & (~a | ~b) -> _c+
@}
@end example

@noindent
This adds extra annotations to affected device names in the spice netlist.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@subsection RAM Cell

Memory cells require special treatment in @HAC{}.
Consider a common 6T SRAM cell, accessed by wordline and bitlines:

@example
defproc sram_cell(bool bl, _bl; bool? wl) @{
  bool f, t;
  @i{// rules for netlist generation}
  prs @{
    @i{// cross-coupled inverters}
    ~f -> t+
     f -> t-
    ~t -> f+
     t -> f-

    @i{// access transistors}
    passn(wl,  bl, t)
    passn(wl, _bl, f)
  @}
@}
@end example

@noindent
The above definition will produce a valid spice netlist, but
will not simulate properly in @hacprsim{} for several reasons:
1) the access transistors written as pass-gates work in only one direction, 
but they need to work for both reading and writing, and
2) on writing, there is a fight between the access transistor
and the opposing pull-up of the feedback inverter.

Thus, the simulation version of the definition must be adjusted.
To address concern 1) we need to replace the pass-gates with rules
that operate in both directions.
@cindex combinational feedback
To address concern 2) we use combinational feedback.

@example
@i{// rules for simulation}
prs @{
  @i{// writing}
    wl & ~bl        -> t-
    wl & ~_bl       -> f-

  @i{// reading}
    [weak=1] t & wl -> _bl-
    [weak=1] f & wl ->  bl-

  @i{// state-holding}
                  f -> t-
                  t -> f-

  @i{// combination feedback}
  ~(wl & ~bl ) & ~f -> t+
  ~(wl & ~_bl) & ~t -> f+
@}
@end example

@noindent
On writing @var{f-}, wordline @var{wl} is 1, and the bitline @var{_bl} is
actively driven to 0,
the combinational feedback for @var{f}+
turns off to let @var{f} pull down, which in turn, 
turns on the feedback for @var{t}+.
During a read, the bitlines @var{bl} and @var{_bl} are precharged
to 1, but are in an undriven state, which allows a
@emph{weak-rule} to pull a bitline to 0 without a fight.
@cindex weak rule
In essence, this is how bidirectional bitlines are simulated.
@cindex bidirectional bitline
A @emph{weak-rule} 
Normally in @hacprsim{}, weak rules are disabled, so to properly simulate
reading from this SRAM cell, you'll need to enable them with

@example
@prsimkbd{weak-rules on}
@end example

@noindent
The complete definition for an sram_cell will look like:

@example
defproc sram_cell(bool bl, _bl; bool? wl) @{
[ NETLIST ->
  @i{// rules for netlist generation}
  ...
[] SIMULATION ->
  @i{// rules for simulation}
  ...
]
@}
@end example

@noindent
Not shown is the circuit definition for the bitline driver and reader.

@noindent
Suggested exercises:
@itemize
@item Design the bitline driver and reader that takes a 
	read/write control signal
@item Design the circuitry that pulses the wordline during a read or write
@item Write a @hacprsim{} script that writes and reads
	sequences of 0s and 1s to a single SRAM cell
@end itemize

@noindent
Further discussion topics:
@itemize
@item Design SRAM cell with separate bitlines for 
	reading and writing
@item Design a multi-read/multi-write ported register cell
@end itemize

@subsection Ignored attributes

The @HAC{} language allows specifying device attributes
such as transistor sizes and threshold voltage.

@example
prs @{
       a<20> & b<20>      -> c-
  ~x<20;lvt> & ~y<20;lvt> -> z+
@}
@end example

@noindent
These are all ignored by @hacprsim{}.
Only the @hacknet{} netlist generator will use these attributes.  
As a design matures from purely digital to physical,
more of these attributes will be used to fine-tune 
the generated spice netlist (without affecting @hacprsim{} behavior).  


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Shared Internal Nodes
@section Shared Internal Nodes

@HAC{} also supports a syntax for describing shared internal nodes
in tranistor networks.  
This network description is syntactically translated by @hacknet{}, 
but re-interpreted into equivalent production rules by @hacprsim{}.

@subsection Footed Transistors

The following example defines and uses a single internal node:

@example
prs @{
  en & on       -> @@en_-  @i{// declares internal node, footed by @var{on}}
  ~@@en_ & x & y -> a-     @i{// starts stack with internal node}
  ~@@en_ & z & w -> b-     @i{// starts stack with internal node}
@}
@end example

@noindent
Internal nodes are declared and referenced with a prefix @t{@@} symbol.
The resulting netlist has 6 transistors, with a common node shared
betwen the transitors gated by @var{on}, @var{x}, and @var{z}.
@hacprsim{} interprets the above by expanding the 
shared nodes to their corresponding definition expressions:

@example
prs @{
  @i{// equivalent rules}
  en & on & x & y -> a-
  en & on & z & w -> b-
@}
@end example

@noindent
The internal node features lets a designer express physical topology
and logic in the same form, without resorting to 
conditional compilation on tool variables.  

@subsection Sum Logic in Adders

@cindex sum logic
@cindex parity logic
The sum output of an adder is basically a parity operation
on inputs.  Suppose our adder inputs come paired with their complements
(as they would in dual-rail families):
@var{a.t}, @var{a.f}, @var{b.t}, @var{b.f}, @var{ci.t}, @var{ci.f}.
Let us also use a precharge family of logic, using @var{en}
as the precharge/enable signal.
Non-shared production rules simply follow the truth table:

@example
prs @{
  en & (( a.f & b.f & ci.f ) |
        ( a.f & b.t & ci.t ) |
        ( a.t & b.f & ci.t ) |
        ( a.t & b.t & ci.f ))  -> _s.f-
  en & (( a.f & b.f & ci.t ) |
        ( a.f & b.t & ci.f ) |
        ( a.t & b.f & ci.f ) |
        ( a.t & b.t & ci.t ))  -> _s.t-
@end example

@noindent
This first version starts with 14 transistors.  
The @var{_s} nodes are inverted into @var{s}, 
which will remain the same throughout this example.

@example
prs @{
  _s.f                         => s.f-
  _s.t                         => s.t-
@}
@end example

@noindent
The first transformation we can apply is to share the (large) 
transistor footed by @var{en}.

@example
prs @{
  en                           -> @@en_-
  ~@@en_ & (( a.f & b.f & ci.f ) |
        ( a.f & b.t & ci.t ) |
        ( a.t & b.f & ci.t ) |
        ( a.t & b.t & ci.f ))  -> _s.f-
  ~@@en_ & (( a.f & b.f & ci.t ) |
        ( a.f & b.t & ci.f ) |
        ( a.t & b.f & ci.f ) |
        ( a.t & b.t & ci.t ))  -> _s.t-
@}
@end example

@noindent
This version has 13 transistors because @var{en} is shared.
This is safe because the rest of the logic guarantees that there
are no sneak paths between @var{_s.f} and @var{_s.t} through the 
shared node network.
Next, we can introduce pairs of partial-sum internal nodes 
one input at a time.

@example
prs @{
  en                            -> @@en_-
  ~@@en_ & a.f                   -> @@p1f-
  ~@@en_ & a.t                   -> @@p1t-
  (~@@p1f & b.f) | (~@@p1t & b.t) -> @@p2f-
  (~@@p1t & b.f) | (~@@p1f & b.t) -> @@p2t-
  (~@@p2f & ci.f)|(~@@p2t & ci.t) -> _s.f-
  (~@@p2t & ci.f)|(~@@p2f & ci.t) -> _s.t-
@}
@end example

@noindent
This final version has 11 transistors, 
and is logically equivalent to the original version.

@subsection Carry Logic in Adders

@cindex carry-out logic
@cindex majority logic
@exercise{} Implement the carry-out (majority) function with dual-rail
inputs on @var{a}, @var{b}, and @var{ci}, and dual-rail output @var{co}.


@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Internal Precharges
@section Internal Precharges

@cindex charge sharing
@cindex precharge
A designer may wish to add precharges to a netlist as a means of 
mitigating charge sharing, and other internal node effects.  
@HAC{}'s PRS sublanguage supports a syntax for specifying precharges.
Precharge annotations have no impact on logical behavior
in @hacprsim{}; they only affect @hacknet{}'s spice netlists.
A precharge expression can be attached to any @t{&}-operator, 
which represents an internal node.

@example
bool en, x, y, zx, zy;
prs @{
  en &@{+~en@} x  -> zx-
  en &@{+~en@} y  -> zy-
@}
@end example

@noindent
The above example shows two stacks, each with its own PMOS precharge.
The following example, uses a shared foot transistor on @var{en}:

@example
bool en, x, y, zx, zy;
prs @{
  en                -> @@en_-
  ~@@en_ &@{+~en@} x   -> zx-
  ~@@en_ & y         -> zy-
@}
@end example

@noindent
Note that the precharge expression @t{@{+~en@}} is only attached
to one of the stacks, but both stacks share the same internal
node @t{@@en_} and thus, benefit from the shared precharge.

@itemize
@item Stacks may have an arbitrary number of precharges.
@item Pull-up stacks may also contain precharges.
@item Precharges can also be expressions, not just single literals.  
@item Pull-up and pull-down precharges can be used in either
	pull-up or pull-down rules.
@end itemize

@subsection Precharge Invariants

@cindex invariants
@hacprsim{} has a built-in safety check for precharges.
Everywhere a precharge is used, the simulator produces an invariant
asserting that the precharge on an internal node does not
cause a short between supplies.  
For every precharge expression @var{P} pulling up a node
footed by expression @var{G},

@example
  G &@{+P@} & ... -> o-
@end example

@noindent
the invariant expression @t{~(G & P)} must hold to prevent shorting, 
because G pulls the internal node down, and P pulls the node up.  
(Pull-down precharges are also allowed, denoted @t{-} instead of @t{+}.)
The following example produces simulator invariant:

@example
bool _Reset, Re, Le, Ld, _rd;
prs @{
  _Reset & Re & Le          -> @@_in-
  ~@@_in &@{+~Re & ~Le@} Ld    -> _rd-
@}
@end example

@example
@prsimkbd{invariants .}
[top-level]
invariants:
$(~((~Re & ~Le) & (_Reset & Re & Le)), "[auto] precharge interference")
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Custom Power Supplies
@section Custom Power Supplies

The default power supply model in @HAC{} and @hacprsim{} is very simple:
all circuits are powered by a single, global supply and ground,
named @var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND} at the top-level.
However, the language and tools allow a designer to take full control
over power supply connectivity everywhere in the hierarchy.  
In @HAC{}, a designer can express explicit power-gating, 
and separation of multiple power supplies.  

@subsection Implicit Supplies

Every process (defined by @t{defproc}) comes with two supply ports,
@var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND}.
By default, these are the supplies that are connected to 
the netlist for the subcircuit (at both source and substrate terminals).  

@subsection Overriding Supplies

There are two ways of overriding supply connections.
The first is to connect different supplies at the instance level:

@example
defproc inv(bool? in; bool! out) @{ ... @}

bool myVdd, myGND, x, y;
inv foo $(myVdd, myGND)(x, y);   @i{// override}
@end example

@noindent
The @t{$(...)} list gives direct access to the @var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND} 
ports of every process.
When omitted, they simply connect to the current level's 
implicit supplies @var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND}.

The second way to override supplies is to provide custom supply ports
and override the @t{prs} body.

@example
defproc inv(bool? V, G; bool? in; bool! out) @{
  V @@[supply=1];
  G @@[supply=0];
  prs <V,G> @{ ... @}
@}
@end example

@noindent
@var{V} and @var{G} are declared as input ports and
tagged with supply attributes.  (The attributes help the compiler
check for misconnections between supplies and non-supplies.)
The @t{<V,G>} tells the @hacknet{} to use the given nodes as supplies
instead of @var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND}.
In fact, unused ports @var{!Vdd} and @var{!GND} will be omitted
from the subcircuit definition in the netlist.
Users may prefer this style as it is more consistent
with the rest of the language.

A process definition may use multiple supplies in different @t{prs} blocks.

@example
  prs <V1,G1> @{ ... @}
  prs <V2,G2> @{ ... @}
  prs <V3,G3> @{ ... @}
@end example

In a few sections, we will discuss how these impact simulation.

@subsection Overriding Substrate Contacts

Substrate contacts can also be overridden.

@example
prs <Vsrc, Gsrc | Vsub, Gsub> @{ ... @}
@end example

Anytime the substrate connections need to differ from the
supply sources, the two implicit supply ports will not suffice --
you will have to pass in extra explicit supply ports, 
and override them using @code{prs<...|...>}.  

Again, substrate connections only affect the netlist, 
not digital simulator behavior.

@subsection Modeling Dynamic Power Supplies

Even with supplies, override, @hacprsim{} simulates all circuits
as if they share the same single global poewr supply unless you use
the one or more of the following command-line options at startup.

@itemize
@item @option{-f dynamic-power-supply}
@item @option{-f dynamic-ground-supply}
@end itemize

With these options on, production rules are expanded as if
the supplies participate in the rules (conjunctively).
For example with @option{-f dynamic-power-supply}, when 
you query the fanin of a rule you will see @var{!Vdd}
(or whatever supply you connected):

@example
@prsimkbd{fanin c}
Fanins of node `c':
(from J):
[after 10]      ~b & !Vdd -> c+
[after 10]      b -> c-
@end example

@noindent
This allows a user to dynamically enable or disable entire supply domains, 
by @command{set} commands or other power-gating logic.  

@b{Caveat:} because of the state-holding nature of nodes in
@hacprsim{}, turning off a power supply will not cause nodes
under the supply's domain to go to @t{X}, they will continue to
hold their old value.  
This model does not seem honest and may change in the future.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Debugging
@section Debugging

This section provides examples of debugging sessions featuring
various encountered diagnostics and commands that helped find the root cause.

@subsection Why X?

@subsection Interference

@subsection Instability

@subsection Deadlock

@command{why-not}

@subsection X Cycles

@subsection Counting Transition Cycles

Using @command{backtrace}

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Checkpointing and Tracing
@section Checkpointing and Tracing

@hacprsim{} supports checkpointing, the saving and restoring of simulator
state. 
The primary benefit of checkpointing is the ability to save away state 
for later examination or continuation.
With a checkpoint, one can immediately jump to a snapshot in time
without having to re-run from the beginning.

@subsection Manual Saving and Loading

The @command{save} and @command{load} commands are used to create and restore 
checkpoints and take a single file name argument.  

@example
# stuff happens ...
@prsimkbd{save state1.prsimckpt}
@end example

@noindent
After exiting @hacprsim{}, one can restart it (using the same object file), 
and load the checkpoint:

@example
@prsimkbd{load state1.prsimckpt}
# more stuff happens ...
@end example

@noindent
and pick up exactly where it left off before.

Perhaps obvious, but a particular checkpoint is only valid with the
original object file from which the @hacprsim{} session was launched.  
(There a few safety and sanity checks done at load time.)
The majority of contents in the checkpoint is a flat array of node states,
one for every unique node in the hierarchy, 
no structural information is contained.
The checkpoint file is relatively lightweight because it relies on the
information in the associated object file for hierarchical mapping.

There is no limit (other than space) on the number of checkpoints
that can be saved.

@example
@prsimkbd{save pre-reset.prsimckpt}
# apply resets and cycle
@prsimkbd{save post-reset.prsimckpt}
# load a configuration
@prsimkbd{save post-configure.prsimckpt}
# process a data packet
@prsimkbd{save post-run-1.prsimckpt}
# process another data packet
@prsimkbd{save post-run-2.prsimckpt}
...
@end example

@subsection Automatic Save-on-Exit

One can rarely anticipate the times when a simulation checkpoint is desired,
so a user can request for a checkpoint to be emitted on exiting @hacprsim{}.

@example
@prsimkbd{autosave on autosave.prsimckpt}
# turn on maximum fatal diagnostics
@prsimkbd{mode fatal}
# do stuff with impunity ...
@end example

@noindent
Alternatively, the auto-save checkpoint can be requested via the 
@option{-a} command-line option, followed by any file name.

@example
@shellkbd{hacprsim -a saveme.prsimckpt test_device.haco}
@end example

@noindent
Should the simulator terminate prematurely with an error status, 
there will be a checkpoint saved at the time the error occurred.  
The checkpoint can be loaded for post-mortem analysis, without having 
to manually re-run.  

@subsection Saving Trace

@hacprsim{} supports a means of logging every event to a binary trace file.
The trace file format is a compact format that only @hacprsim{} can read.
Every entry in the trace contains:

@itemize
@item reference to node that changed (a global index)
@item node's old value
@item node's new value
@item reference to last event that caused this node to change (if any)
@end itemize

@noindent
Future plans for trace analysis intend to use this.

@example
@prsimkbd{trace record.prsimtrace}
# normal interaction/script...
@end example

Normally, tracing continues until the simulator exits.
To turn off tracing any time, use the @command{trace-close} command.

@noindent
To trace from the very beginning one can also use the @option{-r}
command-line option:

@example
@shellkbd{hacprsim -r everything.prsimtrace test_device.haco}
@end example

@noindent
A simulation can use both tracing and checkpointing.  

@subsection Vector Change Dump

Vector Change Dumps (or VCD) are an industry-standard format for 
simulation traces.  
To save a trace to VCD, use @command{vcd}.

@example
@prsimkbd{vcd record.prsimtrace}
# normal interaction/script...
@end example

@noindent
Currently, there is no command-line option to turn on vcd tracing
at startup.
Normally, VCD recording continues until the simulator exits.
To VCD-tracing at any time, use the @command{vcd-close} command.

Recording a @hacprsim{}-trace and VCD-trace at the same time is permitted.

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Diagnostic and Behavior Control
@section Diagnostic and Behavior Control

@hacprsim{} offers users the ability to control diagnostic-handling
policies globally.

@menu
* Mode Commands::
* Resetting and Weak-Interference::
* Instabilities in Synchronous Circuits::
@end menu

@node Mode Commands
@subsection Mode Commands

See @command{help modes} for list.

@node Resetting and Weak-Interference
@subsection Resetting and Weak-Interference

Most circuits have some notion of "reset," a way to initialize the circuit
to a known state.  
Resetting is often considered an atypical operation
where one may be less concerned with transient states, 
and only concerned with reaching the settled state.  

@cindex weak interference
@hacprsim{} initial state (upon loading an object file)
has every node at @t{X}, which also means that every guard expression
pulling on every node is pulling @t{X} up and down.  
By definition, every node is in a state of @emph{weak interference}, 
specifically with @t{X} vs @t{X} opposing pulls.
One can confirm this by running @command{status-weak-interference}
at the start of any simulation.  

Reset usually begins when a user @command{set}s a signal (or group of signals)
that triggers a chain of events that drive nodes to @t{0} or @t{1}.
During reset propagation, however there may be situations where
a node undergoes a @emph{transient} @t{1} vs. @t{X} pull fight, 
which would be reported as weak interference.  
To suppress this warning during reset, you could reset like the following:

@example
@prsimkbd{weak-interference ignore}
# set various reset signals...
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@prsimkbd{assertn-queue}
@prsimkbd{status-interference}
@prsimkbd{status-weak-interference}
@prsimkbd{weak-interference warn}
# de-assert various reset signals...
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@prsimkbd{...}
@end example

@noindent
The @command{assertn-queue} command asserts that the event queue
is empty, which is what one would expect upon return from a @command{cycle}.
@command{status-interference} and @command{status-weak-interference}
are used interactively to make sure no nodes are undergoing interference
in the settled reset state.  
(I don't have an @command{assert-} variation of those commands yet,
but it would be easy to add one.)
A more inclusive pair of commands is @command{mode run} and 
@command{mode reset}.  These affect other diagnostic policies.

@example
@prsimkbd{mode reset}
# set various reset signals...
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@prsimkbd{status-interference}
@prsimkbd{status-weak-interference}
@prsimkbd{assertn-queue}
@prsimkbd{mode run}
# de-assert various reset signals...
@prsimkbd{cycle}
@prsimkbd{...}
@end example

@noindent
@command{mode paranoid} turns additional (default) warnings into breaks,
and @command{mode fatal} turns all diagnostic warnings into fatal errors.

@node Instabilities in Synchronous Circuits
@subsection Instabilities in Synchronous Circuits

@cindex instability
@hacprsim{} has its roots in asynchronous circuit development, 
but is also well-suited for synchronous circuit design.
Testing synchronous circuits with @hacprsim{} requires an understanding
of instabilities.  

Recall that an instability is when the guard for a production rule
(whose output event is scheduled) becomes false before the 
scheduled event executes.  
This is forbidden in some families of asynchronous logic, 
and the conservative behavior in such cases is to (after issuing a diagnostic)
turn the affected output node to @t{X},  @emph{even if the new pull state
of the node pulls it to 0 or 1},
because the node value's stability is not guaranteed.  
A glitch may or may not occur, due to timing variation -- 
one cannot know without accurate timing.  
This behavior in @hacprsim{} is made explicit by the commands:
@example
# for asynchronous circuits
@prsimkbd{unstable break}
@prsimkbd{unstable-unknown}
@end example
@noindent
@command{unstable break} tells the simulator to interrupt event processing
(from @command{cycle}) when an instability is encountered.
@command{unstable-unknown} tells the simulator to turn the 
output node to @t{X} on instability.  
The intent of this behavior is to signal to the designer that
this instability needs to be diagnosed and fixed before proceeding further.
The @command{backtrace} and @command{why-}family of commands
are vital instruments in debugging instabilities.  

@cindex synchronous logic
For synchronous circuits, we want to allow transient glitches and 
instabilities because we only sample values on clock edges.  
Use @command{unstable warn} or @command{unstable ignore} to downgrade the 
diagnostic, allowing event processing to continue uninterrupted.
Use @command{unstable dequeue} to simple dequeue an outstanding event in
queue rather than marking the affected node as @t{X}, which effectively
keeps the previous value on that node.  

@example
# for synchronous circuits
@prsimkbd{unstable warn}
@prsimkbd{unstable-dequeue}
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Testing with Channels (synchronous)
@section Testing with Channels (synchronous)

This section provides some complete examples that demonstrate
how to use clocked channel environments to test synchronous circuits.  
Channel environments are a convenient way of driving a test circuit
and checking its output values.

@subsection Clocked Channels

A clocked channel is simply a data bus or wire coupled to a
clock signal.  
The clock serves as a reference for when the data should change,
or when the data should be sampled.  
We define empty structures that pairs clock and data together:

@example
// "clocked_channel.hac"
template <pint N>
defchan cd <: chan(int<N>) (bool clk, d[N]) @{ @}
defchan cd0 <: chan(int<1>) (bool clk, d) @{ @}
@end example

@noindent
These definitions are also provided in the installed header,

@noindent
@file{$prefix/share/hackt/lib/channel_bd.hac}.

@noindent
However, the examples in this section can use just the above definitions.

The names of these structure definitions is of no consequence, 
but the names of the clock and data ports will be important
when we bind these to @hacprsim{}'s channel environments.

@subsection Testing Combinational Logic

Consider the following prototype for a 4-to-1 MUX
@example
// "mux.hac"
defproc mux4(bool? in[4], sel[2]; bool! out) @{
  @i{// not CMOS implementable}
  bool _out;
  prs @{
         in[0] & ~sel[0] & ~sel[1]      -> _out-
        ~in[0] & ~sel[0] & ~sel[1]      -> _out+
         in[1] & sel[0] & ~sel[1]       -> _out-
        ~in[1] & sel[0] & ~sel[1]       -> _out+
         in[2] & ~sel[0] & sel[1]       -> _out-
        ~in[2] & ~sel[0] & sel[1]       -> _out+
         in[3] & sel[0] & sel[1]        -> _out-
        ~in[3] & sel[0] & sel[1]        -> _out+
        _out                            => out-
  @}
@}
@end example
@c from test/prsim/channel-clocked-test-mux-a.hac

@noindent
and a test instantiation
@example
// "mux_test.hac"
import "clocked_channel.hac";
import "mux.hac";
bool in[4], sel[2], out;
mux4 M(in, sel, out);
@end example

@noindent
Instead of using @command{set}, @command{cycle}, and @command{assert}
commands (which can get tiresome), we will use clocked channels to
drive and test.
Append the following to @file{mux_test.hac}:

@example
@i{// --continued--}
bool clk;
cd<4> in_c(clk, in);
cd<2> sel_c(clk, sel);
cd0 out_c(clk, out);
@end example

@noindent
We have declared a reference clock @var{clk}, and bound the input
and output signals to the clock in channels.  
This lets us refer to @var{in_c}, @var{sel_c}, and @var{out_c} as coherent 
clock-data pairs in @hacprsim{}.
The sole purpose for the clock signal is to signal when
inputs should change and when outputs should be sampled.

Load @file{mux_test.haco} into @hacprsim{}.

@example
@prsimkbd{clock-source clk:0 10}
@prsimkbd{channel-timing clk after 100}
@end example
@noindent
This declares that the environment will drive @var{clk}
for 10 positive-edge cycles, one for every vector we will apply.
On @command{channel-reset}, @var{clk} will be set to 0, initially.
We have also configured the @emph{half-clock period} of @var{clk}
to be 100, sufficient for logic to propagate and settle for this circuit.
Next we describe the interpretation of our channel structures.  
@example
@prsimkbd{channel-clocked in_c ~clk:0 d:4}
@prsimkbd{channel-clocked sel_c ~clk:0 d:2}
@prsimkbd{channel-clocked out_c clk:0 d:0}
@end example
@noindent
We intend to drive @var{in_c} and @var{sel_c} as inputs, 
and we have chosen to change their values on the negative-edge 
(indicated by the @t{~} prefix) of the clock,
@var{in_c.clk}, which we've connected to the top-level @var{clk} signal.
The @t{:0} after @t{clk} refers to an initial value, which is 
irrelevant in this example, but needed syntactically.  
The @var{d} in @t{d:N} refers to the name of member of type @t{cd<N>}
that is interpreted as a bit-array of data.  
@t{N} is the size of the data array, or 0 for a single bit wire.
The LSB of (integer) values on these channels corresponds to bit @t{d[0]}.
At this point, we've informed @hacprsim{} on the interpretation of 
user-defined channel structures,
and now we drive them with data.
@example
@prsimkbd{channel-source-args in_c 0xa 0xa 0x5 0x5 15 15 0 0 6 6}
@prsimkbd{channel-source-args sel_c 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 0 1}
@prsimkbd{channel-expect-args out_c 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1}
@end example
@noindent
We have given each channel ten values on the command-line.
As seen in channel @var{in_c}, values can be in 
decimal or hexadecimal (with a leading @t{0x}).
On every cycle of @var{clk}, these channels will apply and advance
one value.
Channel values can also come from a file instead of the command-line, 
using the @command{channel-source-file} and @command{channel-expect-file}
command variants.  
Since our input channels @var{in_c} and @var{sel_c} were configured
as negative-edge sensitive, their data array will change
value on the negative edge.
The output channel @var{out_c} is configured to sample 
values on the positive edge of @var{clk}.
Once the value list is exhausted, a channel-source will remain at
the last value until reconfigured, 
and a channel-expect will stop checking values.

Before we advance the simulation, it helps to set some options
for synchronous circuit simulation and observe what is happening,
see @ref{Instabilities in Synchronous Circuits}.

@example
# for simulating synchronous circuits
@prsimkbd{unstable ignore}
@prsimkbd{unstable-dequeue}
# for informative feedback
@prsimkbd{watchall}
@prsimkbd{channel-watchall}
@prsimkbd{confirm}
@end example

@noindent
In @hacprsim{}, channel names live in their own namespace 
and get their own @command{watchall} command.
The @command{confirm} command prints a message every time a
observed value matches its expected value on a @command{channel-expect},
and with @command{assert}s.

To initialize the state of channels, we could reset individual channels
with @command{channel-reset} commands or in most cases, 
just reset everything with

@example
@prsimkbd{channel-reset-all}
@prsimkbd{cycle}
        10      in[0] : 0
        10      in[1] : 0
        10      in[2] : 0
        10      in[3] : 0
        10      sel[0] : 0
        10      sel[1] : 0
        20      M._out : 1      [by sel[1]:=0]
        30      out : 0 [by M._out:=1]
        100     clk : 0
@end example

@noindent
The @command{cycle} is important because @command{channel-reset-all}
only schedules events in the queue.
Note that the input channels all reset to the 0 value.
After @command{channel-reset}, channels are in the @emph{stopped}
state, i.e. they do not respond to any signal changes.  
Finally, to start driving with our specified values,
use @command{channel-release-all}:

@example
@prsimkbd{channel-release-all}
@prsimkbd{cycle}
        110     in[1] : 1
        110     in[3] : 1
channel in_c (.data) : 10
channel sel_c (.data) : 0
channel out_c (.data) : 0
channel out_c has value 0, as expected.
        200     clk : 1
        300     clk : 0 [by clk:=0]
        310     sel[0] : 1      [by clk:=0]
        320     M._out : 0      [by sel[0]:=1]
        330     out : 1 [by M._out:=0]
channel in_c (.data) : 10
channel sel_c (.data) : 1
channel out_c (.data) : 1
channel out_c has value 1, as expected.
        400     clk : 1 [by clk:=1]
        500     clk : 0 [by clk:=0]
        510     in[0] : 1       [by clk:=0]
        510     in[1] : 0       [by clk:=0]
        510     in[2] : 1       [by clk:=0]
        510     in[3] : 0       [by clk:=0]
        510     sel[0] : 0      [by clk:=0]
        510     sel[1] : 1      [by clk:=0]
channel in_c (.data) : 5
channel sel_c (.data) : 2
channel out_c (.data) : 1
channel out_c has value 1, as expected.
        600     clk : 1 [by clk:=1]
        700     clk : 0 [by clk:=0]
        710     sel[0] : 1      [by clk:=0]
        720     M._out : 1      [by sel[0]:=1]
        730     out : 0 [by M._out:=1]
channel in_c (.data) : 5
channel sel_c (.data) : 3
channel out_c (.data) : 0
channel out_c has value 0, as expected.
        800     clk : 1 [by clk:=1]
        900     clk : 0 [by clk:=0]
...
@end example

@noindent
We were at time 100 during release, so the first rising clock edge
on @var{clk} occurs after a half-clock period, at time 200.
We only specified a limited number of cycles on @var{clk}, 
so it should stop toggling when it has hit that number.

@exercise{} Copy the above commands into a script and run it
non-interactively, like:

@shellkbd{hacprsim -b test_mux.haco < test.prsimrc}

@exercise{} Repeat the above example, but replace one of the middle expected
values on @var{out_c} with an incorrect value (in script), 
or change one of the input values.  
Replace @code{watchall} with just @code{watch clk}, to reduce 
the amount of output.
Re-run the script.  What happens?

@exercise{} Use the @command{channel-source-file} and 
@command{channel-expect-file} commands to obtain values from 
separate files, rather than on the command-line.  

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Testing with Channels (asynchronous)
@section Testing with Channels (asynchronous)

@subsection 4-phase Handshake Channels

@subsection Bundled-Data Channels

@subsection 2-phase Channels

@subsection Level-Encoded Dual-Rail Channels

@subsection Single-Track Channels

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Defensive Design
@section Defensive Design

Subcircuits are often designed with assumptions about their environment,
or limitations of operation.  
@HAC{} SPEC sublanguage supports a syntax for expressions
@emph{invariants}, expressions that should @emph{always} evaluate true.
Good designs should be annotated with invariants that can be
checked by various tools.  

@subsection Invariants
@cindex invariants

The syntax for invariants inside a SPEC body is simply
@itemize
@item @code{$(prs-expr)}
@item @code{$(prs-expr, "description")}
@end itemize

@noindent
where @i{prs-expr} is any expression that can appear
as a production rule guard.
The following invariant asserts that @var{a} and @var{b} are never
true at the same time:

@example
spec @{
  $(~(a & b), "There can be only one.")
@}
@end example

@noindent
@exercise{} write an invariant that asserts that either 1 or 2 out of 3 
signals @var{a}, @var{b}, and @var{c} must be high.  
(Hint: consider the negated case.)

@c Xs and invariants

@subsection Using Atomic Expressions

@cindex atomic expressions
Invariants are often expressed in subexpressions that are
used repeatedly.  To assist in constructing complex expressions,
we can use @emph{atomic expressions} in the @HAC{} language.

@cindex atomic variables
Atomic bools represent boolean-valued expressions at run-time,
but do not correspond to any physical node or wire.
They are defined in the @t{rte} (run-time expression) language bodies,
and can depend on atomic or non-atomic bools.  



@subsection Exclusion Rings

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Workflow Examples
@section Workflow Examples

Examples in this chapter make use of some of the Makefile templates
provided by the @HACKT{} project.

