@c "tips.texi"

@node Tips
@chapter Tips

This section contains the collected wisdom of users of 
the simulator.  
Think of this as an FAQ.  

@menu
* Interactive mode::
* Scripting::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Interactive mode
@section Interactive mode

@b{Readline completion and history}
Hopefully, you or your package has built the HACKT tools with 
the GNU Readline library.
Readline provides numerous line-editing, history, and completion
features that will make the interactive mode much more efficient.  
The most basic feature is cycling through history with the 
up and down arrow keys.
Consult the Readline documentation for details, 
@xref{Top, , Readline, readline, The GNU Readline Library}.


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Scripting
@section Scripting

@b{Long simulations.}
Q: If I have a simulation that is supposed to run infinitely, deadlock-free, 
with the @command{cycle} command how do I check it non-interactively?
(By now you've figured out that in interactive mode, you can
interrupt the simulation with @t{Ctrl-C} to give you back the command prompt, 
or equivalently, send the process a @t{SIGINT} signal.)

A: Instead of @command{cycle}, use @command{advance} or @command{step}
or @command{step-event} to run for a finite time.  
Upon completion of the command, however, one typically wants to verify
that the system did not deadlock.  
@command{assert-queue} will error out if the event queue is empty.  

@b{Checkpointing}.
You can manually save a checkpoint at any time using the @command{save}
command, and restore to using the @command{load} command.  
You can also have the simulator automatically take a checkpoint
upon exit, regardless of the exit status by using:

@example
autosave on FILENAME
@end example

This is particularly useful for analyzing failed simulations that
stop in some unexpected manner.
After a failed run, you have a checkpoint that takes you right to
the moment of failure for further examination.  


