\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename cast2hac.info
@settitle CAST to HAC Migration Guide
@c `on' is the default
@setchapternewpage odd
@c for two-sided book-style printing
@c %**end of header

@c "cast2hac.texi"
@c $Id: cast2hac.texi,v 1.4 2008/11/28 22:07:00 fang Exp $

@dircategory Hierarchical Asynchronous Circuit Kompiler Toolkit (HACKT)
@direntry
* CAST to HAC Migration: (cast2hac).    CAST to HAC Migration Guide.
@end direntry

@c ****************************** macros **************************************
@include hacmacros.texi

@everyfooting left @| @today{} @| right

@copying
This document describes language and tool migration from old CAST to
HAC tools.  

This document can also be found online at @homepagesubref{cast2hac}.

The main project home page is @homepageref{}.

Source code for this document can be found at @sourcerepo{dox/cast2hac}.

@copyrightnotice{2007}

@quotation
Published by ...
 
Permission is hereby granted to distribute this document.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Title page and Copyright
@titlepage
@title CAST to HAC Migration Guide
@author David Fang
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ****************************** contents ************************************
@shortcontents
@contents


@c ****************************** Top *****************************************
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top CAST to HAC Migration Guide
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c @copying is recommended here as well
@menu
* Introduction:: Introduction to the guide.
* Types:: Type system.
* Definitions:: Type definitions.
* Instances:: Type instances.
* Arrays:: instance and value arrays.
* Connections:: connection statements.
* Expressions:: expressions.
* Loops:: repetition constructs.
* Templates:: definition re-use.
* Typedefs:: definition aliases.
* PRS:: production rule sets.
* CHP:: communicating hardware processes.
* Spec Directives:: specification language.
* Legacy Tools:: legacy tools.
* Concept Index:: Concepts and terms.
@end menu

@c ****************************** chapter *************************************
@include intro.texi
@include types.texi
@include definitions.texi
@include instances.texi
@include arrays.texi
@include connections.texi
@include expressions.texi
@include loops.texi
@include templates.texi
@include typedefs.texi
@include PRS.texi
@include CHP.texi
@include spec.texi
@include cflat.texi

@c ****************************** index ***************************************
@ignore
@node Command Index
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex fn
@end ignore

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@c ****************************** finis ***************************************
@bye

