\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hacchpsim.info
@settitle HACKT CHPSIM Manual
@c `on' is the default
@setchapternewpage odd
@c for two-sided book-style printing
@c %**end of header

@c "chpsim.texi"
@c $Id: hacchpsim.texi,v 1.5 2008/11/28 22:07:02 fang Exp $

@dircategory Hierarchical Asynchronous Circuit Kompiler Toolkit (HACKT)
@direntry
* HAC CHPSIM: (hacchpsim).    HAC CHP Simulator.
@end direntry

@include hacmacros.texi

@copying
This manual describes the usage and operation of HACKT's @command{chpsim} 
simulator.  

This document can also be found online at @homepagesubref{hacchpsim}.

The main project home page is @homepageref{}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2007 Cornell University

@quotation
Published by ...
 
Permission is hereby granted to ...
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Title page and Copyright
@titlepage
@title HACKT CHPSIM
@subtitle A simulator manual
@author David Fang
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ****************************** contents ************************************
@shortcontents
@contents

@iftex
@node List of Figures
@unnumbered List of Figures
@listoffloats Figure
@end iftex

@c ****************************** Top *****************************************
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top CHPSIM Manual Outline
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c @copying is recommended here as well
@menu
* Introduction:: Introduction to CHPSIM.
* Usage:: Command-line summary.
* Commands:: Interpreter commands.
* Extending simulation:: User-defined function libraries.
* Event-driven Execution:: How execution works.
* Standard Library Functions:: Function library.
* Command Index:: Interpreter commands.
* Variable Index:: Variables.
* Concept Index:: Concepts and terms.
@end menu

@c ****************************** chapter *************************************
@include intro.texi
@include usage.texi
@include commands.texi
@include extending.texi
@include execution.texi
@include stdchpfn.texi

@c ****************************** index ***************************************
@node Command Index
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@c ****************************** finis ***************************************
@bye

