@c "chapters/connections.texi"
@c $Id: connections.texi,v 1.1.46.1 2009/10/01 17:48:27 fang Exp $

@node Connections
@chapter Connections
@cindex connections

Connections are a relation between @emph{instance references}.  
(Connections are established in the meta-language processing 
of compilation; they are determined at compile-time only.)

@menu
* Aliases:: merging objects
* Port Connections:: equivalent connections
* Implicit Ports:: automatic supply ports
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Aliases
@section Aliases

Instance references refer to specific entities at unroll-time.  
Instance references fall into two categories: implicit and explicit.  
@xref{Arrays}.  
Implicit references infer sizes of the entire array or partial array, 
whereas explicit references fully specify the dimensions.

@cindex aliases
Connections between instance references create @emph{aliases}.  
Before making any connections, all instances in the same scope constitute 
a hierarchy of referenceable objects.  
@c What does @samp{a = b} mean in the namespace or definition context?
As connections (aliases) are made, these object unify, i.e., 
after @samp{a = b}, both @samp{a} and @samp{b} refer to the same object.
Aliasing hierarchical references also unifies them into the same object, 
e.g. @samp{a.x = b.y} result in one object, until further aliased.  
(The number of unique objects shrinks as connections are made.)
Aliasing is sticky; once a connection has been made, there is no 
way to disconnect or undo the connection.  

Publicly accessible references 
(allowing hierarchical access to public ports of structures) 
in any given scope are represented by the set of all legal @emph{names}.  
The size of the names set doesn't change with connections, 
only the number of unique objects that are eventually created.  


@ignore
@itemize
@item Parameters: the value of b is assigned to a.
	This is only valid if @samp{b} is instantiated and initialized, 
	and @samp{a} is instantiated and uninitialized.  
@item Datatypes (both built-in and user-defined), channels and processes:
	@samp{a} and @samp{b} refer to the same instance, in other words, 
	they are @emph{aliases}.
@end itemize
@end ignore

If the types are user-defined, then aliasing is recursive.  
For example, if the type of @samp{a} and @samp{b} has 
members (either public or private) @samp{x} and @samp{y} internally aliased, 
the @samp{a.x}, @samp{a.y}, @samp{b.x}, and @samp{b,y} are all 
valid references to the same instance of @samp{x} and @samp{y}'s type.  
(Implementation:
This can simply be accomplished by mapping @samp{a} and @samp{b}
to the same instance, saving the trouble of recursive aliasing, 
and generating the combinations of names, 
not that that is ever a problem.)

Since connections and aliases are unrolled, the actual unique instance objects 
are not created until all connections have been processed.  


Compiler options (proposed to support):
@itemize
@item @option{-Wprocess-alias}:
	warning for connections between process
	(since the semantics seem arbitrary at this point and 
	are prone to future change), 
@item @option{-Wchannel-connections}: 
	warning for suspicious wrong connections with channels
	(multiple senders or multiple receivers)
@end itemize

@c Support for non-alias connections?

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Port Connections
@section Port Connections
@cindex port connections

Another way of specifying connections is with @emph{port connections}.
A process instance @samp{p}, whose type contains @i{N} ports can be connected:
@samp{p(...)} with @i{N} comma-separated optional references.  
@example
p(x, y, , z, );
is equivalent to writing:
p.port1 = x;
p.port2 = y;
p.port4 = z;
@end example

@noindent
A port connection must be written with the exact number of slots as
ports in the process definition, where references may be omitted.  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Implicit Ports
@section Implicit Ports
@cindex implicit ports
@cindex supply ports
@cindex implicit supply
@cindex power supply

Processes contain a set of hidden implicit ports for the power supply nodes.
Every process definition effectively declares these supply nodes
as the first two ports, @t{!GND} and @t{!Vdd}, the @emph{primary supplies}.  
@cindex primary supply
(The top-level module definition is treated as a process for this purpose, 
and thus also contains these nodes.)
These ports have slightly different connection semantics than
ordinary referenceable objects.  
First, these ports are specially named so that they cannot be accidentally
referenced directly; @samp{foo.!Vdd} is syntactically illegal.  
Second, these ports do not belong into the same set of explicit ports
that the user defines; they are not counted in the number of standard ports, 
for the purpose of writing port connections.  

@cindex automatic connections
@cindex supply domain
Left unspecified, the default semantics is to @emph{automatically} connect these
supply ports to the respective supply ports belonging to the parent process.
Production rules, alike, also connect to these supply ports by default.  
@xref{PRS Supply Overrides}.
This behavior is intended for subcircuits that fall under a 
single supply domain.

To override the supply ports, one writes:
@itemize
@item @i{supply-override} : @i{proc-inst-ref} @t{$(} @i{GND-node} @t{,} @i{Vdd-node} @t{);}
@item @i{supply-override} : @i{proc-inst-ref} @t{$(} @i{GND-node} @t{);}
@item @i{supply-override} : @i{proc-inst-ref} @t{$(} @t{,} @i{Vdd-node} @t{);}
@end itemize

@noindent
This effectively connects @samp{proc.!Vdd} to @i{Vdd-node}, 
and @samp{proc.!GND} to @i{GND-node}.
Unlike normal aliases, these connections can be replaced; 
subsequent supply override statements will break former connections
to form new ones.  

@example
proc $(, myVdd1);
proc $(, myVdd2);
@end example
@noindent
results in only @samp{proc.!Vdd = myVdd2}, while @samp{myVdd1} remains
disconnected from both.  

Normal port connections may follow supply overrides, 
for example, @samp{proc $(myGND, myVdd) (x, y, z);}.


