@c "chapters/PRS.texi"
@c $Id: PRS.texi,v 1.15 2010/09/01 22:14:17 fang Exp $

@node PRS
@chapter Production Rule Set (PRS)
@cindex PRS

This chapter describes the Production Rule Set (PRS) sub-language.  
PRS operates strictly in the meta-language domain of @HAC{}, 
meaning that all involved instance references and connections are resolved
at compile-time, upon instantiation of each complete definition.  
Production rules, like connections, may be programmed to depend
on meta-language parameters.  

@menu
* PRS Basics::
* PRS Attributes::
* PRS Loops::
* PRS Extensions::
* PRS Options::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Basics
@section Basics
@cindex PRS

Basic production rules are written as follows:

@itemize
@item @i{rule} : @i{PRS-expr} @prsrarrow{} @i{node} @i{dir}
@end itemize

(Reference to lines of grammar...)
(Denotational semantics, type-inference later...)

@cindex literal, PRS
The @i{dir} is either @prsup{} (pull-up) or @prsdn{} (pull-down).  
A @i{literal} is an occurence of a (@bool{}) @i{node} on the
left-hand-side of a production rule.  
A PRS @i{literal} and the right-hand-side node
must be a refer to a single (scalar) @bool{} instance.  
A @i{PRS-expr} may be any boolean expression using the 
operators @prsnot{}, @prsand{}, @prsor{}, and literals.  
(The unary @prsnot{} operator has the highest precedence, 
and the @prsand{} operator has higher precedence than the @prsor{} operator.)

@cindex shorthand PRS arrow
@cindex arrow, PRS shorthand
The rule arrow @prsrarrow{} can be substituted with one of its shorthand forms.
The @prscarrow{} arrow automatically generates the complementary rule 
(pulling on opposite direction) using the DeMorgan inverse of the guard.
The @prsfarrow{} arrow mirrors the rule pulling in the opposite direction
with the same topology but @emph{inverted} literals, mostly useful for
writing C-elements.  For example:
@example
x & y & z    => w-
x & y & z    #> c-
@end example
@noindent
expands to
@example
x & y & z    -> w-
~x | ~y | ~z -> w+
x & y & z    -> c-
~x & ~y & ~z -> c+
@end example

Rules involving internal nodes may only use the plain @prsrarrow{}
notation @ref{PRS Internal Nodes}.

@cindex CMOS-implementable PRS
Since production rules are an abstract description of logic, 
the rules themselves need not be CMOS-implementable.  
Enforcement of CMOS-implementability can be introduced by later tools
or compiler phases where desired.  
(@strong{TODO}: write a CMOS checking pass.)

@menu
* PRS Sizing::
* PRS Internal Nodes::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Sizing
@subsection Sizing
@cindex sizing of PRS

We provide a way of specifying transistor widths for every literal.  
Each literal on the LHS may be followed by an optional size argument:

@itemize
@item @i{literal} :
	@i{node-reference} @{ @t{<} @i{float} @t{>} @}@math{_{opt}}
@end itemize

Ideas: Specify a width/strength on the RHS and automatically infer
the sizes of the literals on the LHS (only for this rule).  

Actually, literal parameters may be any generalized list of expressions.  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Internal Nodes
@subsection Internal Nodes
@cindex internal nodes

A literal may be optionally prefixed with @samp{@@} to indicate that
it is only an internal node, and is not declared as a normal bool.  
Internal nodes are useful for specifying more general 
circuit topologies that share common foot transistors.  
Internal nodes may appear on the left-hand-side of production rules
arbitrarily many times.  
@cindex shared transistors
@cindex shared nodes

@example
en -> @@_en_int-         @r{// defines an internal node}
~@@_en_int & Ld -> _rd-  @r{// uses internal node as foot transistor}
~@@_en_int & Hd -> _md-
@end example

Above, @t{_en_int} is not declared as a bool, but the first rule that
drives it effectively declares it -- an implicit declaration.  
An internal node may only be referenced as the leftmost literal
of any conjunctive (and) term.  
(@strong{TODO}: position is not yet checked, currently performs 
straightforward expression substitution.)

The effective production rules are obtained by substituting
the internal nodes' associated expressions wherever they are used.
With the above example, the effective production rules are:
@example
en & Ld -> _rd-
en & Hd -> _md-
@end example

Internal nodes are implicitly declared in the scope of the enclosing 
definition (or top-level) so their names cannot conflict with
existing declarations.  
Likewise, subsequent declarations cannot re-use names of existing
internal nodes.  

Internal nodes can also be used in arrays, where the dimensions are 
implied by the indexing.  
(@strong{Warning}: node arrays are not supported in ACT.)
One can declare arrays of internal nodes in loops, for example:

@example
(:i:N:
  en & x[i] -> @@_en_i[i]-
  ~@@_en_i[i] & y[i] -> _z[i]-
)
@end example

Each unique internal node may only be defined once in one direction, 
pull-up or pull-down.  
Using an internal node in the wrong sense constitutes an error, e.g.:

@example
x -> @@y-
@@y & z -> w-
@end example

@noindent
is an error because @t{@@y} is defined as a pull-down only expression, 
but is being evaluated active-high in the rule for @t{w-}.  
Negations of internal nodes are @emph{bound to the referenced node}
and dictate the sense in which the node is pulled, 
unlike regular boolean expressions.  

The following is an erroroneous attempt to define the same
internal node in two directions:
@example
x -> @@y-
~x -> @@y+
@end example

Rules involving internal nodes may only use the plain @prsrarrow{} notation.  

Since internal nodes just define re-usable subexpressions, 
production rule attributes are not applicable to them; 
they are simply ignored.  

@strong{Status}: implemented and tested.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Attributes
@section Attributes
@cindex attributes, PRS

We need a clean way to tag nodes and rules with attributes
for various tools.  

@menu
* PRS Node attributes::
* PRS Rule attributes::
* PRS Literal attributes::
* PRS Operator attributes::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Node attributes
@subsection Node attributes
@cindex node attributes
@cindex attributes, node

What happens when we connect nodes with conflicting attributes?

Attributes from super-cells or sub-cells?

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Rule attributes
@subsection Rule attributes
@cindex rule attributes
@cindex attributes, rule

We propose the following syntax for per-rule attributes:
@itemize
@item @i{rule-attrib-list} : @t{[} @i{rule-attrib} @t{;} ... @t{]}
@item @i{rule-attrib} : @i{identifier} @t{=} @i{expr-list}
@end itemize

@i{Rule-attribs} are generalized as key-value(s) pairs, which permits
the programmer to add arbitrary attributes to the language without
adding more keywords to the language.  
@i{Rule-attrib-list}s are just semicolon-delimited lists of one or more
rule-attributes.  
In the case of repeated attributes, the latter pair will override the former.  
Rule-attribute-lists are optional prefixes to PRS-rules.  

For now, the purpose of these attributes is to emit
attribute lines suitable for consumption by another text-based tool, 
such as old versions of @command{prsim}.  
@cindex prsim

Q: What happens when we OR-combine rules with different attributes?

Some existing attributes:

@include prs/attribute-after.texi
@include prs/attribute-weak.texi
@include prs/attribute-rule-sizing.texi
@include prs/attribute-unstab.texi
@include prs/attribute-comb.texi
@include prs/attribute-iskeeper.texi
@include prs/attribute-isckeeper.texi
@include prs/attribute-diode.texi
@include prs/attribute-res.texi
@include prs/attribute-keeper.texi
@include prs/attribute-vt.texi
@include prs/attribute-output.texi
@include prs/attribute-loadcap.texi
@include prs/attribute-always_random.texi
@include prs/attribute-reff.texi

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Literal attributes
@subsection Literal attributes
@cindex literal attributes, PRS
@cindex sizing of PRS
@cindex transistor type override

The literals of the rule expressions may have attributes.  
Literal attribute are mostly for back-end tool-specific use.
Literal attributes are written like other attributes
@samp{key} or @samp{key=value}.  

@itemize
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref}
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref} @t{<} @i{W} @t{>}
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref} @t{<} @i{W} @t{,} @i{L} @t{>}
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref} @t{<} @i{W} @t{,} @i{L} @t{;} @i{literal-attrib} @t{;} ... @t{>}
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref} @t{<} @i{W} @t{;} @i{literal-attrib} @t{;} ... @t{>}
@item @i{literal} : @i{bool-ref} @t{<} @t{;} @i{literal-attrib} @t{;} ... @t{>}
@end itemize

@noindent
The width @i{W} and length @i{L} and literal attributes are all optional.

@include prs/literal-label.texi
@include prs/literal-vt.texi


Ideas:

Instance-specific attributes?

Applications:
@itemize
@item Procedural layout
@item Automatic sizing
@end itemize

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Operator attributes
@subsection Operator attributes
@cindex operator attributes, PRS
@cindex precharge

The @prsand{} operator may take an optional suffix attribute
to indicate that an internal node is precharged.  For example:

@example
en &@{+~en@} Ld & Ci -> _rd-
@end example

@noindent
states that the internal node between gates @t{en} and @t{Ld} is
precharged with a PFET gated with @t{~en}.  


@strong{Status}: parsed, but ignored.
Should this be done with @prsor{} as well?

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Loops
@section Loops
@cindex loops (PRS)
@cindex rule loop

Loop syntax, unrolling, etc...

Loops can appear in expressions and in rules in the PRS language.  
A @i{rule-loop} can be written as:

@itemize
@item @t{(:} @i{loop-var} @t{:} @i{range} @t{:}
	@i{rules} @t{)}
@end itemize

The @i{loop-var} is declared with a identifier, and may be referenced
in the body rules.  
The rule-loop is repeatedly expanded using the values spanned
by the @i{range}.  
(The range may be written implicitly or explicitly.)
If the range evaluates empty, then the body is skipped during unrolling.  
Rule-loops may be nested, i.e., they may contain other loops.  
The current limit for the size of an expression is 65535 sub-expressions.

An expression-loop is written as:
@itemize
@item @t{(} @i{op} @t{:} @i{loop-var} @t{:} @i{range} @t{:}
	@i{PRS-expr} @t{)}
@end itemize
The @i{loop-var} and @i{range} have the same meanings as when used
in rule-loops.  
@i{op} may be @prsand{} or @prsor{}.  
The body expression is repeatedly expanded with the @i{op} operator.  
Expression-loops may be nested, i.e., they may contain other expression-loops.  
If the range evaluates empty, ...
@b{We need to specify these semantics}!

Interpret the following:
@itemize
@item @code{(@prsand{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@item @code{(@prsor{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@item @code{z @prsand{} (@prsand{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@item @code{z @prsand{} (@prsor{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@item @code{z @prsor{} (@prsand{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@item @code{z @prsor{} (@prsor{}:i:0: x[i]) @prsrarrow{} y-}
@end itemize

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Extensions
@section Extensions

This section describes some of the recent extensions to the PRS language.  

@menu
* PRS Macros::
* Pass-gates::
* PRS Supply Overrides::
* PRS Substrate Overrides::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Macros
@subsection Macros
@cindex PRS macros
@cindex macros, PRS

As an alternative to a PRS-rule, one may write a macro to represent
some custom topology of a netlist or as shorthand for an expansion.  

We propose the following syntax for macros:

@itemize
@item @i{PRS-macro} : @i{identifier} @t{<} @i{expr-list} @t{>} @t{(} @i{PRS-literal-list} @t{)}
@item @i{PRS-macro} : @i{identifier} @t{(} @i{PRS-literal-list} @t{)}
@end itemize

We do not hard-code any built-in macros into the language with keywords, 
rather we allow the programmer to define the meaning of each macro.  
Macros can also take parameters inside angle-brackets, 
where the @i{expr-list} is a list of comma-separated expressions.  
The number of arguments for a macro may also be variable, 
and is defined by the macro's implementation.  
The macro mechanism can potentially be used to attach attributes
to nodes and other subnets.  
As the list of macros grows, they should be documented here.  

Examples of macros one may wish to define:
@itemize
@item @t{passn} --- @i{<W,L>(g,s,d)} @math{W} is an optional transistor width, 
	@math{L} is an optional length.  If only one parameter is passed, 
	it is interpreted as the width.  @math{g, s, d} are the
	gate, source, and drain, respectively.  
	The pseudo production rule generated (@t{cflat prsim}) 
	is @emph{uni-directional}, i.e. the drain is driven as the output.  
@item @t{passp} --- analogous to @t{passn}
@item @t{pass} --- full symmetric pass-gate
@item @t{assert}
@item @t{stat}
@item @t{comb-fb}
@end itemize

The remaining sections discuss other extensions that have been proposed
at other times.  
See which ones could be folded into a general macro!

Below are a list of macros documented in the source file
@file{Object/lang/PRS_macro_registry.cc}.

@include prs/macro-passn.texi
@include prs/macro-passp.texi
@include prs/macro-echo.texi

@strong{New:} Pass-gate parameters may now take optional transistor type
overrides (@samp{lvt, hvt}).  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Pass-gates
@subsection Pass-gates
@cindex pass-gates

True pass-gate logic was missing from the original CAST-PRS implementation.  
A pass-gate could be emulated as a latch if the `direction' of operation was
known at compile time.  
Not having to support pass-gates greatly simplified other pieces of the 
tool-chain, such as LVS and PRSIM.  

We propose the following syntax for pass-gates:

@enumerate
@item @math{node_1} @t{<-} @math{node_2} @t{->} @math{node_3}
denotes an NFET connecting @math{node_1} and @math{node_3} gated by @math{node_2}
@item @math{node_1} @t{<+} @math{node_2} @t{+>} @math{node_3}
denotes a PFET connecting @math{node_1} and @math{node_3} gated by @math{node_2}
@ignore
@item @math{node_1} @t{<=} @math{node_2} @t{=>} @math{node_3}
denotes an NFET connecting @math{node_1} and @math{node_3} gated by @math{node_2}
	with a PFET gated by @math{\overline{node_2}}
@end ignore
@end enumerate

@ignore
In all cases, @math{node_2} may be a literal node or its complement, 
prefixed with a tilde.
@end ignore
@math{node_{1...3}} are production rule literals.  
In case 1, when @math{node_2} is logic-1, the nodes on either side are connected.
In case 2, when @math{node_2} is logic-0, the other terminals are connected.  
@math{node_2} may be given an optional size to specify the 
width of the transmission-gate.  
In all cases, 
if nodes on opposite sides are both driving in opposite directions, 
then it is considered a short-circuit (error).  
If neither side is driving, and the nodes' states are in opposition, 
then both nodes will become unknown (X). 
Otherwise, the one side that is being driven will flip the other side.  

@math{node_2} may be given an optional @t{<size>} argument for specifying
gate width.  

Technically, one may use pass-gate to construct arbitrary transistor
topologies.  

Writing a production rule in terms of equivalent pass-gates
will not produce sane digital behavior in simulation because
of the unidirectional nature of the generated equivalent rule.  
(They should, however, result in the same netlist in backends.)
Hence, all standard logic should be writte as rules, not pass-gates.  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Supply Overrides
@subsection PRS Supply Overrides
@cindex supply overrides
@cindex power supply

Production rules assume that a pull-up rule is implicitly connected to
some high power supply (often @t{Vdd}) and pull-down rules are rooted
at some low supply (often @t{GND}).  
The simulated interpretation of rules is agnostic to the actual supply used.  
When left unspeciifed, rules by default connect to the implicit supplies
for each process, @t{!Vdd} and @t{!GND}.  @xref{Implicit Ports}.
For netlist back-ends, however, the way to override the supply nodes
for a block of production rules is to pass in replacement supplies:

@itemize
@item @t{prs} @t{<} @i{Vdd} @t{>} @t{@{...@}}
@item @t{prs} @t{<} @i{Vdd} @t{,} @i{GND} @t{>} @t{@{...@}}
@end itemize

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Substrate Overrides
@subsection PRS Substrate Overrides
@cindex substrate overrides
@cindex body contacts

By default, the @emph{supply} contact for a set of rules is also used to
connect to the substrate (body) contacts for a given type of transistor.  
There may be cases where one wants to use a different substrate connection
than the corresponding supply, for instance with power-gating.  
The substrate contacts of transistors for netlist back-ends can be overridden
with an additional set of @t{prs} parameters:

@itemize
@item @t{prs} @t{<} ... @t{|} @i{BVdd} @t{>} @t{@{...@}}
@item @t{prs} @t{<} ... @t{|} @i{BVdd} @t{,} @i{BGND} @t{>} @t{@{...@}}
@end itemize

All arguments are optional; the @t{prs} parameters always form a 
4-tuple, which includes the default connections when left unspecified.  


@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node PRS Options
@section Options

Compiler warnings:

CMOS-implementability (exceptions allowed for attribute).  
(This happens to be implemented as an error condition in @command{hacknet}.)

Staticizers?

