@c "ipple/commands.texi"
@c $Id: commands.texi,v 1.2 2011/05/03 19:20:35 fang Exp $

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

This chapter documents the various commands available in
the interpreter.  
Commands are organized into categories.  

@strong{FYI:} the command documentation has been extracted from 
source file @file{PR/pr-command.cc}.  

@menu
* Built-in Commands::
* General Commands::
* Simulation Commands::
* Info Commands::
* Tracing Commands::
* Debug Commands::
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Built-in Commands
@section Built-in Commands

The following commands are listed in the @t{builtin} category.  

@include cmd/help.texi
@include cmd/echo.texi
@include cmd/comment.texi
@include cmd/exit.texi
@include cmd/abort.texi
@include cmd/repeat.texi
@include cmd/interpret.texi

The following command is useful for showing each executed command.

@include cmd/echo-commands.texi

The following commands pertain to command aliases.

@include cmd/alias.texi
@include cmd/unalias.texi
@include cmd/unaliasall.texi
@include cmd/aliases.texi

Shell commands may be executed by prefixing a line with '!'.  
For example, @samp{!whoami}.  

@strong{New}:
Block comments are pseudo C-style, using @t{/*} and @t{*/} to enclose comments.
It is recommended to start use block-comment delimiters on their own lines
to avoid confusion.  
The line parser is very crude.
Nested comments are supported.  
Files with unterminated comments will be reported as errors.  
@t{#}-comments are allowed within block comments.  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node General Commands
@section General Commands

The following commands are listed in the @t{general} category.  

@include cmd/source.texi
@include cmd/addpath.texi
@c @include cmd/paths.texi

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Simulation Commands
@section @t{simulation} Commands

@include cmd/seed48.texi
@include cmd/place.texi
@include cmd/pin.texi
@include cmd/scatter.texi
@include cmd/step.texi
@include cmd/snap-gravity-wells.texi
@include cmd/kill-momentum.texi
@include cmd/shake-all.texi

Simulation and convergence routines.

@include cmd/simple-converge.texi
@include cmd/descend-gradient.texi
@include cmd/descend-gradient-converge.texi
@include cmd/descend-potential.texi
@include cmd/descend-potential-converge.texi

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Info Commands
@section @t{info} Commands

@include cmd/dump-state.texi
@include cmd/dump-parameters.texi
@include cmd/dump-objects.texi
@include cmd/dump-positions.texi
@include cmd/dump-energy.texi

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Tracing Commands
@section @t{tracing} Commands
@cindex checkpoint

Checkpointing is useful for saving the state of the simulator, 
which allows one to interrupt and resume long simulations, 
and also examine points of failure in detail.  

@include cmd/save.texi
@include cmd/load.texi
@c @include cmd/autosave.texi

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Debug Commands
@section @t{debug} Commands

This section is reserved for commands that are only useful for debugging
the simulator.  
Some commands that end in @t{-debug} have already been mentioned
in the other sections.  

