@c "config.texi"
@c $Id: config.texi,v 1.12 2010/10/27 00:16:50 fang Exp $

@c ****************************************************************************
@node Configuration Options
@section Configuration Options
@cindex configuration

There are two ways to pass configuration options to @command{hacknet}.
One is through the @option{-f} option on the command-line, 
the other way is to pass them in through a configuration file 
with the @option{-c} option.  
The option value specifications share the same syntax:
@i{key=values} where @i{values} can be blank, a single value, 
or a comma-separated list of values.  
A key-value specifier is not permitted to have spaces
in the string!
The values themselves cannot contain comma characters.  

In a configuration file, blank lines are ignored, 
as well as lines that begin with @t{#} (pound).
Where boolean values are expected, pass 0 for @var{false}, 
or 1 for @var{true}.  

The following parameters are used to manage distributed configuration files.
This allows one to create incrementally different configurations.  

@include config/config_path.texi
@include config/config_file.texi

The following parameters affect emitted device sizes and units.

@include config/lambda.texi
@include config/length_unit.texi
@include config/area_unit.texi
@include config/electrical_units.texi
@include config/std_widths.texi
@include config/stat_widths.texi
@include config/min_width.texi
@include config/min_length.texi
@include config/max_p_width.texi
@include config/max_n_width.texi
@include config/fet_type_overrides.texi

The following options are related to transistor parasitics.  
@cindex parasitics

@include config/emit_parasitics.texi
@include config/fet_perimeter_gate_edge.texi
@include config/fet_diff_overhang.texi
@include config/fet_spacing_diffonly.texi

@command{hacknet} provides several options for formatting the
emitted output (because not all SPICEs are created alike).
@cindex formatting
@cindex SPICE-formatting
@cindex Spectre-formatting

@include config/output_format.texi
@include config/emit_top.texi
@include config/nested_subcircuits.texi
@include config/empty_subcircuits.texi
@include config/subcircuit_definition_style.texi
@include config/instance_port_style.texi
@include config/unused_ports.texi
@include config/prefer_port_aliases.texi
@include config/preferred_names.texi
@include config/emit_node_aliases.texi
@c @include config/top_type_ports.texi
@include config/transistor_prefix.texi
@include config/subcircuit_instance_prefix.texi
@include config/pre_line_continue.texi
@include config/post_line_continue.texi
@include config/comment_prefix.texi

The following options are used for name mangling
type-names and instance-names.
By default, no mangling is done to keep the output (more) human-readable.

@cindex mangling
@cindex name-mangling
@include config/mangle.texi
@include config/emit_mangle_map.texi
@include config/reserved_names.texi

@include config/diagnostic_policies.texi

