\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hacknet.info
@settitle HACKT Netlist Generator Manual
@c `on' is the default
@setchapternewpage odd
@c for two-sided book-style printing
@c %**end of header

@c "hacknet.texi"
@c $Id: hacknet.texi,v 1.4 2010/04/02 22:17:29 fang Exp $

@dircategory Hierarchical Asynchronous Circuit Kompiler Toolkit (HACKT)
@direntry
* HACKNET: (hacknet).    HAC Spice netlist generator.
@end direntry

@include hacmacros.texi

@copying
This manual describes the usage and operation of HACKT's @command{hacknet} 
spice netlist generator.  

This document can also be found online at @homepagesubref{hacknet}.

The main project home page is @homepageref{}.

Source code for this document can be found at @sourcerepo{dox/net}.

@copyrightnotice{2009}

@quotation
Published by ...
 
Permission is hereby granted to distribute this document.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c Title page and Copyright
@titlepage
@title HACKNET : SPICE Netlist Generator
@subtitle A netlist generator manual
@author David Fang
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ****************************** contents ************************************
@shortcontents
@contents

@c @iftex
@c @node List of Figures
@c @unnumbered List of Figures
@c @listoffloats Figure
@c @end iftex

@c ****************************** Top *****************************************
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top HACKNET Manual Outline
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c @copying is recommended here as well
@menu
* Introduction:: Introduction to CHPSIM.
* Tutorial:: Quickly getting started.
* Language Features:: Netlist features in the HAC language.
* Usage:: Command-line summary.
* Algorithms:: Internal implementation details.
* Concept Index:: Concepts and terms.
@end menu

@c ****************************** chapter *************************************
@include intro.texi
@include tutorial.texi
@include lang.texi
@include usage.texi
@include algo.texi

@c ****************************** index ***************************************
@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@c ****************************** finis ***************************************
@bye

