@c "chpsim/intro.texi"
@c $Id: intro.texi,v 1.2 2009/08/28 20:44:40 fang Exp $

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@pindex hacknet

@hacknet{} is a SPICE netlist generator for the @HACKT{} suite.  
The input is a @HAC{} file containing production rules, usually
connected through instance hierarchy.  
The output is a hierarchical netlist with devices, subcircuits, 
and instances.  
The output should be suitable for SPICE-like circuit simulators.  

@section How It Works

The translation of production rule sets (PRS) to spice netlists
is mostly straightforward.  
Production rule guard expressions are boolean expressions, 
which lend themselves easily to syntax-directed translation
into trees of transistors in series or in parallel.  

@example
prs @{
  a & b & c -> o-
  a | b | c -> p-
@}
@end example

@section Production Rule Requirements
@cindex CMOS-implementable

CMOS transistors are inverting in nature.
A PMOS transistor pulls its drain up when its gate is low, 
and an NMOS transistor pulls its drain down when its gate is high.
To produce a valid netlist from production rules, 
the production rules must be written @emph{CMOS-implementably}, 
that is, only negated literals may participate in pull-up guard expressions,
and only non-negated literals may participate in pull-down guard expressions.

The following examples are invalid:
@example
prs @{
  a & b -> j+    @i{// error: non-inverting}
  ~c    -> j-    @i{// error: non-inverting}
@}
@end example

@noindent
The following examples are valid:
@example
prs @{
  a & b -> j-    @i{// inverting, OK}
  ~c    -> j+    @i{// inverting, OK}
@}
@end example

While non-CMOS-implementable rules are acceptable for digital
modeling simulation, 
@hacknet{} will report an error for any non-CMOS-implementable 
production rules.
It is advised to write CMOS-implementable production rules 
as early as possible.

