@c "lang.texi"
@c $Id: lang.texi,v 1.2 2009/10/02 01:56:14 fang Exp $

@node PRS Supply Override
@section PRS Supply Override
@cindex supply override


Recall that every process definition has two implicit ports for the 
power supply, @t{!GND} and @t{!Vdd}.
When unspecified, the default behavior automatically connects
transistors and subcircuits to these @emph{primary supplies}, 
hierarchically and recursively.  
There are two places where we can override these supplies.  

To override the supplies used to drive production rules 
(pull-up and pull-down) and pass-gates, we can write:

@example
prs <myVdd> @{
... @i{// These rules use myVdd to pull-up, and !GND for pull-down}
@}
prs <myVdd, myGND> @{
... @i{// Use myVdd to pull-up, myGND to pull-down}
@}
prs < , myGND> @{
... @i{// Use !Vdd to pull-up, myGND to pull-down}
@}
@end example

Rules that balong to a supply domain will use the specified supply node
for the drain of the foot transistor(s), and for the substrate (body)
terminal.  

@example
prs <myVdd,myGND> @{
  x & y -> z-
@}
// begets:
M0 myGND x #0 myGND nch W=5u L=2u
M1 #0 y z myGND nch W=5u L=2u
@end example

Normally, single-supply domain circuits need not be written
with explicit production rule supply overrides.
Instead, they can be connected externally to different supplies
when instantiated, which is described in the next section.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Instance Supply Override
@section Instance Supply Override
@cindex instance supply override
@cindex process supply override

All processes have implicit primary supply ports @t{!Vdd} and @t{!GND}, 
that are accessed differently than normal ports.  
By default, a process instance will connect its primary supply ports
to those of its immediate parent process.
To specify a different supply, one can write:

@example
bool myVdd, myGND, x, y;
inverter foo;
foo $(myGND, myVdd);
foo (x, y);

inverter yoyo(x, y);
yoyo $(myGND, myVdd);

inverter bar $(myGND, myVdd);
bar (x, y);

inverter bq $(myGND, myVdd) (x, y);
@end example

@noindent
Either supply port may be ommitted to use the corresponding 
default primary supply.  
@strong{Alert:} note that the supply ordering for instances is @t{GND, Vdd},
whereas for production rules, it is @t{Vdd, GND}.

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Substrate Override
@section Substrate Override

Substrate contacts can also be overridden, independently from the supply ports.
There are a total of 4 overrideable implicit ports per PRS block.
Substrate connections only affect the netlist,
not digital simulator behavior.

@example
prs <Vsrc, Gsrc | Vsub, Gsub> @{ ... @}
@end example

Anytime the substrate connections need to differ from the
supply sources, the two implicit supply ports will not suffice --
you will have to pass in extra explicit supply ports,
and override them using @code{prs<...|...>}.

A process definition may contain multiple PRS blocks, each with different
supply and substrate overrides.

@example
defproc foo(...) @{
  @i{// default supplies and substrates, !Vdd and !GND}
  prs @{ ... @}
  @i{// default substrates, !Vdd and !GND}
  prs <Vsrc1, Gsrc1> @{ ... @}
  @i{// overriding all substrates and supplies}
  prs <Vsrc2, Gsrc2 | Vsub, Gsub> @{ ... @}
@}
@end example

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Configuration help
@section Configuration help

A quick way to list all of the known configuration options with their
default values is:

@example
$ hacknet -d
@end example

@noindent
The output can be pasted into a file for modification.
To use a configuration file, pass the @option{-c} option:

@example
$ hacknet -c my.hacknet-conf inv.haco-c > inv.spice
@end example

