@c "chpsim/tutorial.texi"
@c $Id: tutorial.texi,v 1.2 2010/04/02 22:17:30 fang Exp $

@node Tutorial
@chapter Tutorial
@cindex tutorial

This chapter demonstrates the basic usage of @command{hacknet}
for generating SPICE-netlists.
A complete description of features and options follows
in the next chapters.

@menu
* Compiling and Running::
* Transistor Ordering::
* Dimensional Units::
* Transistor Sizing::
* Transistor Attributes::
* Staticizers::
* Transmission Gates::
* Shared Internal Nodes::
* Internal Precharges::
* Subcircuits::
* PRS Supply Override::
* Instance Supply Override::
* Substrate Override::
* Configuration help::
@end menu

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Compiling and Running
@section Compiling and Running

In this section, you will compile an example of a top-level
circuit into a spice netlist with @hacknet{}.
Write the following HAC file, @file{inv-top.hac}:

@example
bool x, y;
prs @{
  x => y-
@}
@end example

@noindent
Compile the source to an object file:

@example
@shellkbd{haco inv-top.hac inv-top.haco}
@shellkbd{haccreate inv-top.haco inv-top.haco-c}
@end example

@noindent
Generate a netlist:

@example
@shellkbd{hacknet inv-top.haco-c > inv-top.spice}
@end example

@noindent
@hacknet{} normally produces output to @t{stdout}, so its output
should be redirected to a file.
The resulting output should look like:

@example
My:dn:0 !GND x y !GND nch W=5u L=2u
My:up:0 !Vdd x y !Vdd pch W=5u L=2u
@end example

The resulting netlist produces a set of transistors at the top-level.
The @t{!Vdd} and @t{!GND} nodes are implicit power supplies.
The default device types are @t{nch} for NFETs and @t{pch} for PFETs.
Default widths and lengths were chosen because none were specified.  

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Subcircuits
@section Subcircuits

Process definitions are emitted as subcircuit definitions, 
and can be instantiated with the SPICE @t{X} card.  

Write the following HAC file, @file{inv-def.hac}:

@example
defproc inv(bool x, y) @{
prs @{
  x => y-
@}
@}
@end example

@noindent
Compile the source to an object file as before.  
Since there are no top-level instances, you'll need to tell 
@command{hacknet} what type to emit as the top subcircuit.  

@example
$ hacknet -T 'inv' inv-def.haco-c
@end example

@noindent
should produce:

@example
.subckt inv<> !GND !Vdd x y
My:dn:0 !GND x y !GND nch W=5u L=2u
My:up:0 !Vdd x y !Vdd pch W=5u L=2u
.ends
@end example

@noindent
Use of single-quotes around the type argument is encouraged
(in fact, only required for template parameters to protect the 
@t{<>} characters from being interpreted by the shell).  

Finally, entire hierarchal netlists can be produced by instantiating
subcircuit definitions.  Write the following file @file{invs.hac}, 
and compile it into @file{invs.haco-c}:

@example
import "inv-def.hac";

// pair of inverters
defproc foo(bool a, b, c) @{
inv p(a, b), q(b, c);
@}

foo bar;
@end example

@noindent
Run @command{hacknet}:

@example
$ hacknet invs.haco-c > invs.spice
@end example

@noindent
to produce the following hierarchical netlist.

@example
.subckt inv<> !GND !Vdd x y
My:dn:0 !GND x y !GND nch W=5u L=2u
My:up:0 !Vdd x y !Vdd pch W=5u L=2u
.ends

.subckt foo<> !GND !Vdd a b c
xp !GND !Vdd a b inv<>
xq !GND !Vdd b c inv<>
.ends

xbar !GND !Vdd bar.a bar.b bar.c foo<>
@end example

In this example, there is a top-level instance of type @t{foo} named @t{bar}.

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Transistor Ordering
@section Transistor Ordering

The netlist produced depends on how production rules are written.
While the boolean operators @code{|} and @code{&} are logically
commutative and associative, the ordering of terms around
@code{&} determine the ordering of transistors between
supply and output.  The leftmost term will be closest to the supply,
and the rightmost term will be directly connected to the output node.
Re-arranging terms around the @code{|} operator produces equivalent 
netlists, though the order in which devices appear in the netlist may change.

One may care about series term ordering for a number of reasons:
performance, signal integrity, charge-sharing.  

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Dimensional Units
@section Dimensional Units
@cindex units

Spice netlists can refer to geometric dimensions in 
units like micros and nanometers.
@hacknet{} internally operates @emph{unitlessly}, however, 
there is a global scale factor called @emph{lambda}
that translates written values into absolute sizes.  
By default, @t{lambda}=1, and @t{length_unit=u} (for 1 micron).  
The value of @t{lambda} should be set in a configuration file
that corresponds to your process node and foundry.  
@ref{Configuration Options} lists parameter values supported
by @hacknet{}'s configuration files.  

For the remaining examples in this section, 
we will assume the default @t{lambda=1} and @t{length_unit=u}.

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Transistor Sizing
@section Transistor Sizing

Some features of the @HAC{} language were added specifically
for the sake of netlist generation.  
We briefly describe them here, but the reader is referred to
the full @HAC{} language documentation, specifically
chapters "Connections" and "PRS".

@c link?

The production rule sub-language has enhancements to allow annotation
of netlist attributes.  
There are two ways of explicitly sizing devices: 
using the @t{W} (width) rule attribute to apply to all literals, 
or using a literal attribute to size a single device.
The default width is 5 units.  

The following examples illustrate variations in sizing devices.

@example
prs @{
                           @i{// widths:}
  [W=20] x & y -> ...      @i{// x=20; y=20}
  [W=20] x & y<30> -> ...  @i{// x=20; y=30}
  [W=25] x<20> & y -> ...  @i{// x=20; y=20}
@}
@end example

@noindent
The last example shows that after a sized literal, 
literals that follow in series (@t{&}) get the same size, 
unless explicitly resized.  
Most of time transistor stacks will use a consistent width.  

The default transistor length is 2 units.  
Device lengths can also be specified, for longer channel devices.
The rule attribute is @t{L} for length, and the literal 
parameter is in second position.

@example
prs @{
                               @i{// W,L}
  [L=4] x & y -> ...           @i{// x=5,4; y=5,4}
  x<6,3> & y<6,12> & z -> ...  @i{// x=6,3; y=6,12; z=6,12}
@}
@end example

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Transistor Attributes
@section Transistor Attributes

@subsection @t{iskeeper}

The @t{iskeeper} attribute is used to signify (by device naming) that
a transistor or group participates in state-holding feedback.
This may aid other tools that read netlists.  
For @hacprsim{}, rules flagged @t{iskeeper} are not even simulated.  

@example
prs @{
  [iskeeper]          x_ => x-
  [iskeeper;W=4;L=10] y_ => y-  @i{// example with multiple attributes}
@}
@end example

There is also a related attribute @t{isckeeper} to flag rules 
as participating in combinational feedback.

@subsection Voltage Threshold

@hacknet{} supports three variants of voltage thresholds in devices.  
The default is @t{svt} for a "standard" threshold.  
The other two are @t{lvt} and @t{hvt} for "lower" and "higher" thresholds.

@example
prs @{
  [hvt] _z        => z-      @i{// NMOS and PMOS of inverter are hvt}
  x & y<;hvt> & z -> q-      @i{// only the y-gate is hvt}
@}
@end example

@noindent
The semicolon in @code{y<;hvt>} is needed to separate the implicit
width and length parameters (omitted) from the list of attributes.

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Transmission Gates
@section Transmission Gates

@cindex transmission gate
@cindex pass gate
@cindex macros

@HAC{}'s PRS language uses the macros @t{passn} and @t{passp}
to emit pass transistors (NMOS and PMOS).

@example
prs @{
  passn(gate, source, drain)  @i{// NMOS transistor}
  passp(gate, source, drain)  @i{// PMOS transistor}
@}
@end example

@noindent
While in @hacprsim{}, the pass gate is treated unidirectionally, 
@hacknet{} just emits a single transistor that functions bidirectionally.

The two complementary pass gates can be combined as follows:

@example
defproc full_pass (bool? in, en, en_; bool! out) @{
  prs @{
    passn(in,  en, out)
    passp(in, en_, out)
  @}
@}
@end example

@noindent
Pass gates also take width and length parameters and attributes, 
just like expression literals:

@example
prs @{
  passn<20,2;lvt>(in,  en, out)
  passp<20;hvt>  (in, en_, out)
@}
@end example

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Staticizers
@section Staticizers

@hacknet{} does not automatically emit staticizers (keepers) for
dynamic nodes; it is the designer's resposibility.  
@HAC{} does provide an attribute for labeling transistors from
feedback rules as those participating in staticizing.

@example
prs @{
  [iskeeper]          x_ => x-
  [iskeeper] ~Reset & ~y -> y+
@}
@end example

@noindent
Tools that consume netlists with this annotation
can treat such transistors differently when analyzing circuits.  

@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Shared Internal Nodes
@section Shared Internal Nodes
@cindex internal nodes
@cindex shared nodes

With production rules, one can think of every @t{&} operator
translating to an unnamed internal node.  
@hacknet{} just assigns these nodes auto-enumerated names like
@t{#0}, @t{#1}, etc.

While standard production rules are adequate for expressing
series and parallel transistors, a syntax extension is required for
explicitly naming and referencing shared internal nodes.  
In @HAC{}, internal node are named with @t{@@} prefixes.

@example
prs @{
  a & b           -> @@_int1-    @i{// internal node declaration}
  ~@@_int1 & c & d -> o-         @i{// internal node use}
@}
@end example

@noindent
In this example, @t{@@_int1} is defined as the named internal node
footed by @t{a&b}.  
Then @t{@@_int1} is referenced in the @emph{negated} sense because
it is considered `on' when it is pulled low.
A pull-up PMOS stack with an internal node might look like the following:

@example
prs @{
  ~a & ~b          -> @@_int2+    @i{// internal node declaration}
  @@_int2 & ~c & ~d -> o+         @i{// internal node use}
@}
@end example

The following example illustrates how internal nodes can be used to 
describe a criss-cross topology found in the precharge evaluation
of a full-adder's sum term.

@example
prs @{
  en                            -> @@en_-
  ~@@en_ & a.f                   -> @@p1f-
  ~@@en_ & a.t                   -> @@p1t-
  (~@@p1f & b.f) | (~@@p1t & b.t) -> @@p2f-
  (~@@p1t & b.f) | (~@@p1f & b.t) -> @@p2t-
  (~@@p2f & ci.f)|(~@@p2t & ci.t) -> _s.f-
  (~@@p2t & ci.f)|(~@@p2f & ci.t) -> _s.t-
@}
@end example


@c - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
@node Internal Precharges
@section Internal Precharges

@cindex charge sharing
@cindex precharge

A designer may wish to add precharges to a netlist as a means of
mitigating charge sharing, and other internal node effects.
@HAC{}'s PRS sublanguage supports a syntax for specifying precharges.
@c Precharge annotations have no impact on logical behavior
@c in @hacprsim{}; they only affect @hacknet{}'s spice netlists.
A precharge expression can be attached to any @t{&}-operator,
which represents an internal node.

@example
bool en, x, y, zx, zy;
prs @{
  en &@{+~en@} x  -> zx-
  en &@{+~en@} y  -> zy-
@}
@end example

@noindent
The above example shows two stacks, each with its own PMOS precharge.
The following example, uses a shared foot transistor on @var{en}:

@example
bool en, x, y, zx, zy;
prs @{
  en                -> @@en_-
  ~@@en_ &@{+~en@} x   -> zx-
  ~@@en_ & y         -> zy-
@}
@end example

@noindent
Note that the precharge expression @t{@{+~en@}} is only attached
to one of the stacks, but both stacks share the same internal
node @t{@@en_} and thus, benefit from the shared precharge.

@itemize
@item Stacks may have an arbitrary number of precharges.
@item Pull-up stacks may also contain precharges.
@item Precharges can also be expressions, not just single literals.
@item Pull-up and pull-down precharges can be used in either
        pull-up or pull-down rules.
@end itemize


